THE HYPERTROPHY TRAINING GUIDE CENTRAL HUB

If you’ve read our Scientific Principles of Hypertrophy Training book, then you’re already one step ahead of the game in terms of understanding the theoretical underpinnings of proper resistance training. And while that book is geared towards strength development (a hypertrophy book is going to occur down the line!), the principles apply greatly to hypertrophy training as well.

But aside from just the principles, a practical guide can be quite useful. YES, you can use just the principles to build your own programs to gain muscle size, but some real-world advice on what those programs can look like can be a huge help in starting to construct your own.

The link between principles and practice is precisely why we made the hypertrophy training guides. Muscle group by muscle group, these guides help you determine the intensity, volume, frequency, and kinds of exercises (as well as video instructions on how to perform them) that are likely to serve as the foundations of your muscle-building programs.

But, before you dig into the individual muscle training guides, please have a look at the Training Volume Landmarks article so that you can make more sense of the volume recommendations given by the individual guides. 

Back
Abs
Traps
Triceps
Forearms
Calves
Front Delts
Glutes
Chest
Biceps
Quads
Hamstrings
Side Delts
Rear Delts

Please enjoy these articles, feel free to share them, and best of luck in your muscle gain journey!

TRAINING VOLUME LANDMARKS FOR MUSCLE GROWTH

Updated: Jan 04, 2017

Basic Assumptions

When discussing how much training we should be doing to grow the most muscle we can, it helps to become familiar with some important theoretical concepts. These concepts or “landmarks,” as we refer to them, can help you understand how we can come to conclusions about how much training should be done and be able to more readily make sense of the recommendations.

First, a technicality. We know from the literature that training volume is related to growth, and we also know that, to a point, more volume is better. We also know that different volumes tax the body’s recovery capacity and stimulate its growth systems differently. So when we say “10 weekly working sets per muscle group isn’t too fatiguing for - and will yield some good gains in - most people,” this statement could be wildly wrong without some base assumptions. For example:

The sets are each at 10% of 1 rep max, so the reps are in the hundreds. We know that outside of special conditions, weights should be at least about 30% of 1RM to cause much growth, so in this case, not much growth would result.
The sets are each at 95% 1RM. 10 sets of true near-maxes per week can and will crush most lifters, so obviously the statement of “isn’t too fatiguing for most people” would be wrong. The top end of the loading range for best hypertrophy outcomes - and the one assumed in the advice to follow - is roughly 85% 1RM.
10 sets of training with each set stopped 6 reps short of muscular failure is not even remotely taxing or muscle gain-inducing, while 10 sets of training with each set taken to and even beyond concentric failure is a serious disruption and might be beyond the weekly capacities of some to reliably recover. 
Given that such wild inconsistencies are possible, how the hell can we keep blathering on about “volume” in terms of numbers of sets? Well, we’ll have to agree to make some assumptions. But the good news is that these assumptions are not arbitrary. The assumptions we will make actually reflect the structure of most training done for muscle size. From now on and in the following articles published in this guide, we are assuming each “working set” to be:

Between 30%1RM and 85%1RM on average
Between 5 reps per set and 30 reps per set on average
Between 4 reps and 0 reps away from concentric muscular failure (4 RIR – 0 RIR)
Those assumptions are very much in line with how most folks train for size (or at the very least, should be training). The good news? Once we make those assumptions, comparing set vs. set within that range becomes very useful instead of a total crapshoot. Do heavier weights fatigue you more than light weights? You bet. But lighter weights allow for higher rep sets. So, while each rep doesn’t fatigue you as much, each set has more of them. The result of this balance is that both the hypertrophic stimulus and fatigue generated by each set between roughly 5 and 30 reps is about the same. Volume AND intensity cause growth and fatigue, and when one goes up per set, the other goes down to preserve a roughly even effect. So, from now on, when we say “training volume” in these discussions, we’re using “number of working sets” as a proxy for that volume as it best relates to adaptation (growth) and fatigue.



 

Counting Sets for Volume

In the recommendations made in the “training tips” series, we usually recommend volumes (MV, MEV, MAV, MRV) by set numbers. Seems straightforward enough: 10 sets of quad work is like, 6 sets of squats and 4 sets of leg presses, or 5 sets of hack squats and 5 sets of smith machine close stance squats. 

And, for that example, it’s just about that simple. But what about using the incline press to train chest? Certainly, 4 sets of incline barbell presses can count as 4 chest sets, but does it count as front delt work as well? And, if we’re counting front delts for incline presses, why not count triceps as well for overhead presses? They are heavily involved. While we’re at it, why not count all presses for triceps too, and count all rows and pullups towards bicep volume, and the like? 

We could do that, but, the truth is, supporting muscles don’t work as hard as main movements, and hence don’t count to the same degree. After barbell bench presses, you’re likely to get sore in your chest, but, unless you’re very untrained, you almost never get sore in the triceps just from bench pressing. Sure, triceps contribute to the bench, but if we only counted presses of various kinds for our triceps work, we’d quickly be up to MRV levels of volume for our triceps. In reality though, the actual stimulus to the triceps might be something like halfway to the actual MRV of the triceps.

One way to solve this problem is to begin the practice of splitting up each exercise into fractional set counts. So, for instance, let’s say that chest and triceps both need about 20 sets per week to hit their MRVs. If we did 20 sets of bench press for chest, we’d hit our MRV for the week. But, if we estimate that bench presses only stimulate the triceps about half as much as a more direct triceps movement, we might say that after that 20 sets of bench, we have completed 10 tricep “sets worth” of volume, and 10 sets remaining to hit our triceps MRV. Note that the exercises we choose for completing those remaining sets must not involve the chest at all, because it would cause us to exceed our chest MRV.

If we follow this road of hyper-precision, we could eventually develop a system of partial set-equivalent assignment for every exercise in our toolbox. For example, we could surmise that overhand pullups are one set’s worth of work for the lats, a half set for the rear delts and one third of a set for the forearm flexors (including the biceps). Given sufficiently accurate and precise estimates of how much each exercise affects each muscle, this method would work quite well.

The problem with this method is that it’s too calculation-intensive and laborious for most of us. It also assumes we know the fractional contribution of each muscle to each exercise quite precisely, where in reality we’d be very roughly guessing much of the time. Instead, in the “training tips” series, we’re going to go with a simpler yet nearly as effective approximation. When listing how many working sets the MV, MEV, MAV, and MRV for a muscle group are, we’ll be referring only to exercises on which those muscles are either prime movers or are isolation moves to specifically target those muscles. Moreover, because we know that those muscles will be targeted with indirect work via movements meant to target other muscles (kind of like dips target the triceps but hit the chest somewhat as well), we will reduce our estimates for those MV, MEV, MAV and MRV values to make recovery space in the program for the effects of that indirect work.

A simple example is when we say “18 sets of triceps work is the MRV for triceps”, we mean that, between all of the other presses and pulls (long head of the triceps is trained in pulling movements), we figure the triceps get another 4 or so “full sets worth” of work to bring the muscle to its full physiological MRV of roughly 22 sets or so. As such, reading through this guide, all you have to know is that the set numbers listed for the muscles are direct and prime mover work only, and the ancillary volume has been factored in so you don’t have to play around with fractions between sets of pullups. 

Could we have tracked volume differently via an alternate method that offers its own merits? Of course.  For our purposes, however, please assume that we only recommend volume in prime mover and isolation sets, and have made room for extra volume, such that total volume is still within range. You may one day encounter - or develop - a program that has a lot more indirect work for a given muscle than normal or much less than normal (a very high frequency chest pressing program with regard to triceps, or a leg training program with no hip hinging and thus no indirect back work, for example). In this case, you can adjust the volume landmarks for those target muscles, and use your best judgement of how much stimulus and fatigue you’re actually experiencing using that program. What we would not recommend is attempting to predict in advance how to discount the recommended volume landmarks offered here.

With our agreed-upon volume calculations in hand, let’s now look at 4 different volume landmarks and establish exactly what each means, as we heavily rely on them in these guides! 

MV = Maintenance Volume

This is the amount of training (aka number of sets) that allows you to maintain your current level of muscular size. If you’ve never trained, obviously that amount is zero sets! But when you begin training hard and make gains above your body’s default levels of muscle, you’ll need to train at least at your MV to retain those gains. Bad news: there is no way to retain previously gained muscle without training. Good news: MV is actually very low, and you can typically keep almost all of your muscle with as little as 6 working sets per muscle group per week. Another piece of good news is that your training loads go up as you build muscle, so the relative effort you must put in to maintain muscle stays stable over the long term. Though we might expect the MVs of advanced lifters to be much higher than 6 working sets per week, they usually aren’t, and set for set, beginner and advanced alike need about the same volumes to keep muscle on. 

Volume landmarks can change somewhat depending on your training frequency, so it’s important to note that MVs in these articles are for individuals training at least 2x per week per muscle group. It’s possible that similar MVs can be attained training 1x per week, but, for smaller muscles that recover quickly (like rear delts), some deviation may arise. As such, the MVs in our guides assume a training frequency of 2x per week for each muscle group. 

We’ll also have maintenance volume guesstimates listed for each muscle group in the muscle group training guide... but why? Don’t we want gains instead of just maintenance? For sure, but periods of low volume training are important on occasion, to give your growth processes a break, allowing them to recharge back to their maximum effectiveness. Likewise, if you find yourself unable to hit the gym as often as you need to make gains, knowing your MVs allows you to put in just enough time to at least hold onto your existing gains until you can ramp up your training to build on them. Lastly, if your whole body’s ability to recover (systemic MRV) is capping your training volume, lowering some muscles to MV training can free up enough recovery ability to train the muscles you want to prioritize for max growth. 

MEV = Minimum Effective Volume 

This is the amount of training that actually grows your muscles: anything below this amount may only maintain them. If, like most of us, you’re training to make gains, you had better make sure to be above your MEV: your minimum effective volume. Notice that, unless you literally want to make the slowest gains possible, your average weekly training volume should be above your MEV, which is the minimum volume required to make any gains. That said, your MEV is a great place to start the first week of your mesocycles and build up from there. For those who just recently started training, growth comes faster, making their MVs and MEVs nearly identical. However, the minimum volume needed to grow climbs higher and higher the more training experience you have. As such, your MEV starts to really leave your MV behind as you grow from an intermediate to an advanced level. 

In each muscle training guide, we’ll demonstrate how MEV changes depending on the frequency of training you choose for each muscle. 

MAV = Maximum Adaptive Volume 

Finally: the range of volumes in which you make your best gains. It’s much more of a range than the other volume landmarks because it changes greatly within each training microcycle (week to week). Every time you train a specific muscle group with a specific set of exercises, weights, and volumes, muscle growth results. Overload the system, and you get results. But systems adapt, and what was very overloading last session is no longer as overloading in the following one. In order to keep optimally overloading, you must use some combination of heavier weights and higher volumes with each successive microcycle in the accumulation phase of training. Recapping: each time you train hard, the volume needed to get the same great gains in the next session goes up, and thus, your MAV continually goes up through the mesocycle. Eventually, the amount of volume to keep you progressing at the best rates actually hits and then exceeds the amount of volume you can recover from. This makes further gains impossible within that microcycle, and demands a deload to drop the accumulated fatigue and restart the progression in the next mesocycle. Because the MAV changes markedly after each training session, it can’t be a fixed goal, but rather a range you aim to move your volume through. For most intents and purposes, that range sits between the MEV and MRV. This means that you’ll start the volume of most of your mesocycles either at or just above your MEV, and work up to around your MRV over the course of the mesocycle. The average volume in that range is thus your MAV. 

All of this begs the question: if neither dipping to your MEV nor climbing to your MRV is optimal, why not get your best gains during each microcycle of the meso by training with volumes within the narrow range smack in between your MEV and MRV?

The first problem is that this approach doesn’t allow for enough progression. Let’s say 16 sets per week is your MAV for a certain muscle group. You hit 16 sets in the first week and get great gains! Ok, now what? If you do 16 again next week, that’s no longer your MAV, so you have to go up. If your new MAV is 18 sets, you’re only going to be able to hit maybe a week or two more before you run straight into your MRV and can’t go any further. You’ll need to deload to drop fatigue, and thus your accumulation:deload ratio is going to be quite low. Starting below 16 sets would have afforded you a longer period of quality training. In fact, because you might be doing rep ranges or exercises you’re not used to, your growth response per set may be even higher than estimated, making your actual MAV less than 16 sets at the beginning of a mesocycle. At the other end of the spectrum, if you start at 12 sets but deload once you  reach 16, not only do you have a shortened mesocycle, but you also miss out on the benefits of functional overreaching from approaching or just passing your MRV during the last accumulation week before your deload. However you slice it, to give your muscles the quality time and repeated overload stimulus needed for optimal growth, starting at the low end and ending at the high end of your MAV range is best. And that means first finding your MEV and MRV, and running most of your mesocycles between the two. So, if your MEV is about 12 sets and your MRV is about 20 sets per week, you might run a mesocycle that looks something like this:

Week 1: 12 sets
Week 2: 14 sets
Week 3: 16 sets
Week 4: 18 sets
Week 5: 20 sets
Week 6: 6 sets (deload)
You’ll notice in the individual muscle group guides that the MAV is just the range from MEV to MRV, so beginning closer to MEV and ending closer to MRV is the best way to reliably hit your MAV. 

The frequency modulation of MAV is a bit more complex, but research has shown a few things. First, it seems that in the short term, higher frequency is usually better for muscle growth. In addition, moderate frequency studies have shown that much over 8 sets per session seems to reduce per-session MAV, such that doing 12 sets per muscle group per session might actually grow no more muscle than 8 sets, and 15 sets per session might grow less. This is likely because those last 3 sets might cause more damage than they do growth and actually take resources away from growth and route them towards recovery. There isn’t enough research yet on the bottom end of per-session MAVs, but it’s probably around 2-3 sets for the highest frequencies (6x per muscle group per week). Thus, training that starts around 2-3 sets per session and doesn’t significantly exceed 10 sets per session has a good chance of being around MAV, so long as the total volume of sets per week adds up to between weekly MEV and MRV. Thus, you can hit MRV training with 6 sets per session, and you might only need 3 such weekly sessions to do so. Or, you might also hit it with just 3 sets per session, though you might have to train up to 6x a week to do that. 

MRV = Maximum Recoverable Volume 

Your body can only recover from so much. Once all of your body’s recovery systems are in full use, any more disruption to the system (training being a big one) will cause incomplete recovery during that time. Yes, training hard is great, but if you train harder than your body can recover from, you can forget about gains, because those will be thrwarted by inadequate recovery. Many training studies on beginners show limited or no growth early in the training process. The main reason for this is that the new act of training constitutes such a big shock to the beginner’s systems, that their bodies initially prioritize recovery at the expense of any real growth. Only after training for a few weeks do their bodies obtain the ability to tolerate their training volume, and heal enough to have resources left for growth. 

So, while your MEV tells you about the minimum volume you need to grow, your MRV tells you about the maximum. Going all the way up to and maybe even just over your MRV right before deloading can actually make you grow even more via the process of “supercompensation via functional overreaching,” but chronically training at or above your MRV will not result in any significant gains. Because of the benefits of overloading and functional overreaching, MRV volumes are ok to hit once at the end of an accumulation phase, but steer clear of (below) at all other times. The takeaway: climb to your MRV instead of jump straight to it. 

Individual Differences 

Now that you’re keen on the terms, you might be curious to see the values! What IS the MAV for biceps? What is the MEV for chest? Those numbers will be revealed in their respective muscle group articles, but let’s remember their limitations:

They are ROUGH averages. If we say the average MRV for a muscle group is 15 sets but yours is 10 or even 20 sets, that’s not entirely unlikely! If yours is 5 or 30 sets, that would be much more surprising. Feel free to use the numbers given as starting guides, not as definitive waypoints.
They are based on our reading of available Sport Science literature as well as personal and coaching experience with lots of clients and athletes. Some of these averages will be dead-on for you, and others considerably off. Track your training and your results to find your own values.
Your values will change as a function of several factors: how well recovered you are day to day and week to week, your growing experience, and as you gain weight or lose weight. Don’t just assume that your MRV this month is going to be the same as next month or next year… always finetune and measure your performance against your recovery.
Even different exercises and the orders in which they’re performed yield different landmark values. You might be able to maintain all of your quad gains with just 5 sets of heavy squats a week, but it might take you 8 sets of leg presses and 10 sets of leg extensions to get the same effect. Generally speaking, the heavier and more full ROM the exercise is, the lower your MEVs and MRVs for it are going to be. A rule of thumb is that the same exercises that are most fatiguing tend to be more effective. Yeah, squats beat you up more than leg presses, but they also grow you more. As such, if 25 sets of leg presses is your MRV, programming 25 sets of squats isn’t a prudent decision. Make realistic adjustments based on how various exercises affect you. Yes, different exercises and even techniques will have different stimulus to fatigue ratios (SFRs), and the most effective exercises have the lowest MEVs and highest MRVs. Which ones is for you to figure out through experimentation and learning from the outcomes of your training. 

Finding your Own Training Volume Landmarks

After reading all of the muscle-specific articles in this training tips series, you’re in a great place to start with your own training. But, because the landmarks here are just rough average guides, you’re going to want to hone in on more precise personal landmarks that apply to you. Let’s find out how to go about this.

Finding your MV

Repetition strength is the most reliable performance correlate of muscle size. Once you’re used to training and used to training a certain rep range, the only way to produce very meaningful increases in rep efforts is to increase muscle size. For those who’ve trained for some time, to go from benching  225 to 250 for 10 max reps, you need to gain size. Conversely, if you’ve been practicing bench for reps for weeks but find yourself benching 205 for max 10, if dieting, you may have lost muscle doing so, possibly causing your dip in performance.  

How can you find your own MV? In the normal process of periodizing your training, every several months - perhaps 2-3 out of the year - should be spent in maintenance training and eating to let your body get resensitized to growth. Chronic high volume training will desensitize your muscles to growth after several months of such training. When you first start doing these maintenance mesocycles, try to follow the MV recommendations in this article series. If at the end of each maintenance meso your rep strength has been conserved, then it’s enough volume for you to maintain at. Next time you do a maintenance phase, try a lower volume and see if you can still maintain at it: your MV may be lower than our estimates. If your rep strength has declined after a maintenance phase, then it’s not enough, and you’ll want to go with a higher volume again the next time around. Over the course of several macrocycles (aka maintenance and hard training mesos strung together), you should have a more precise estimate of your MV. Note: your MVs are often much lower than you might think, so be very conservative on the volumes you start out with when guessing at them.

Finding your MEV

There are two ways to find MEV: the longer, more precise way, or the quick and dirty way.

The long way is to start training a muscle at its recommended MEV and keep it there for a whole mesocycle while increasing weights each week as usual but not increasing sets. At the end of that mesocycle or at the beginning of the next one, you check your performance on core exercises for that muscle group and see if it improved. If so, the volume you did last meso was at or above your MEV for that muscle group. If it did not change or decreased, it’s below your MEV. If performance improved, next time you train that muscle at MEV, try lowering your MEV estimate by 2 sets per week, and track your performance. Do this until you reach a volume that doesn’t improve your performance after a meso at MEV: your MEV is probably about 2 sets higher than that. If you’re concerned that training at MEV all the time is a waste of time in terms of optimizing muscle growth, you’re right to be! Thus, you should only do this sort of long-form MEV estimation when MEV-only training makes sense in your periodized plan, such as when you drop some muscles to MEV during a fat loss diet or a priority phase for other muscles. In other words: don’t spend months training at MEV at the cost of your gains just to find values that will change later anyway! 

The short way to find, or rather, proxy, MEV is to use some feedback from how your workouts are feeling. 

To proxy your MEV per session, do a number of sets you think is close to your MEV, and evaluate the effects by assessing the following 3 metrics:

Did the session give you a pump? 
If you got no pump at all ⇒ 0 points
If you got an ok pump ⇒ 1 point
If you got a great pump ⇒ 2 points
Did the session make your target muscles feel like they were challenged?
If your target muscles felt like they barely worked ⇒ 0 points
If your target muscles felt plenty of tension and got plenty fatigued ⇒ 1 point
If your target muscles felt stressed and exhausted to nearly their limits ⇒ 2 points
Did the session make you sore?
If you didn’t get sore at all ⇒ 0 points
If you got stiff for a few hours after or a bit sore the next day ⇒ 1 point
If you got sore for a few days or more ⇒ 2 points
Having been as honest as possible when assessing your score for each dimension, now tally them up for your total score. If you score a total of 0 or 1, then you’re almost certainly under your MEV. If you score between 2 and 4, that’s probably a good guess of your session MEV. If you score a 5 or 6, that’s very likely higher than your MEV. 

These are per-session MEV values, and they work well for 2-6x per week muscle group training. For 2x muscle group training per week, a value of 4 from the questionnaire is likely to be closest to your weekly MEV. For 3-4 sessions per week, a 3 is likely closest to your weekly MEV, and for 5-6x weekly sessions per muscle group, 2s in all of the sessions are likely closest to your weekly MEVs, with some sessions even dipping into 1 ratings.  

Finding your MAV

Because MAV begins at MEV, we’ll need to start our first week of training around our estimated MEVs and go from there. Because MAV changes every week, here is how you can adjust your volumes to stay on the heels of your MAV:

Once you get through your first week, you can look back on it and decide how to progress in sets using the super-secret RP “Set Progression Algorithm.” 

For each session last week, how sore did you get?

You didn’t get sore at all (1 point) ⇒ 1 point
You got stiff for a few hours after or a bit sore the next day but healed well in advance of your next session for that muscle group ⇒ 2 points
You got DOMS but healed completely just in time for your next session for that muscle group ⇒ 3 points
You got DOMS, which persisted into your next training session for that muscle group ⇒ 4points
  How was your performance?

You hit your target reps 2 RIR or more above what was planned for that week OR you had to do 2 or more extra reps to match planned RIR ⇒ 1 point
You hit your target reps at the RIR planned or 1 above it OR you had to do no extra reps or 1 or more extra rep to match planned RIR ⇒ 2 points
You hit your target reps at a lower RIR than expected ⇒3 points
You couldn’t match your last week’s reps no matter the RIR ⇒ 4 points
Mind you, the performance scale applies to the average of all sets in an exercise, so if you had a few amazing sets and a few very tough sets, for example, you just average that to “2 or 3” on the above algorithm. 

Here’s how to make sense of the set progression calculator. If you scored a 1 on BOTH soreness and performance, you can probably add 2-3 sets to that exercise in the next week’s session. If you got 2 on both, or a 1 on one and a 2 on the other, you can add 1 set to that exercise next week. If you scored ANY 3s on performance and a 3 or 4 on soreness, you should not add any sets to your next week’s exercise for that session. If you scored a 4 on performance, you should consider taking a recovery session, half-week, or deload.  

If this all sounds way too complicated, you can just think of it like this: 

If you are recovering ahead of schedule, add sets
If you are recovering from soreness just on time or even a bit late but still meeting performance targets, don’t add sets
If you’re under-recovering and failing to meet performance targets, you need to take a recovery session or even to deload, as you can’t keep progressing at the rate you’re going
By using this algorithm, you can make sure that you’re increasing your sets to support your optimal growth at every week of the accumulation phase. 

Finding your MRV

Since MRV is the maximum recoverable volume, we find it by seeing when we’re unable to recover. In the Set Progression Algorithm above, we’re likely detecting MRV when we hit a #4 on the performance scale. Basically, you’re performing worse than you did in the last week’s equivalent session, and thus we can suspect that you’re not recovered because you’re over your MRV.  

That very much could be, but how do we know if we’ve found our actual average MRV under normal conditions, or just gotten a measurement error? Believe it or not, the two most powerful scientific instruments ever devised are repetition and recording. Work your way up in volume through each week of training and record your responses. When you notice an inability to recover (aka, get a #4 from the Set Progression Algorithm), our best recommendation is to just assume that’s your MRV, and either take a recovery session, half-week, or full deload. That said, if you’ve had a week marked by significantly decreased sleep or increased stress, these abnormalities may have lead to erroneous detection of your MRV, which you may not have reached with those training volumes under normal circumstances. In that case, you can simply repeat the volume you did last week during the next one (going up by a small amount in weight, of course) and see if your performance is back to the levels it was two weeks ago. If it is, you’re good to keep going and not actually yet at your MRV. If you’re again down in performance or down even more than you were last week, you’re very likely at your actual MRV, and you need to program recovery training for at least that muscle group ASAP. 

Directions vs. Dogmas

Does the MV really not change much over one’s training career? Probably. Should most mesocycles start at MEV or should some start above it? Not sure. Do beginners benefit by going all the way up to their MRVs every meso or might they be better served saving that practice for when they approach advanced level? The jury is still out. So, while the basic concepts here are pretty set in stone, many of the nuances have yet to be ironed out. What this means for you is that all of these concepts and the training structures they create are great starting points for your training, but never dogmas to follow to the letter. Staying open-minded yet skeptical and basing your training on the available evidence will yield best results. And, if and when stronger evidence starts to accumulate in convincing amounts, altering your approach accordingly will serve you well!

AB (ABS) GROWTH TRAINING TIPS

Updated: Dec 16, 2019

Let's also review our key training volume landmarks and relate them to training our abs: 

MV = Maintenance Volume:
For most, no ab training at all can maintain the abs. Unless you’re very advanced and train abs specifically on their own often and hard, just training all of the muscles of your body will leave your abs plenty big for physique purposes. In fact, you can even gain ab size without training them directly… check out the section on MEV!

MEV = Minimum Effective Volume:
Zero sets per week. Yep. You can pretty much do NO direct ab work and still grow abs for a very long time. This is because the heavy loading of your compound heavy basics like squats and deadlifts provides a decent ab stimulus. But, if you want your abs to really GROW, and not at a snail’s pace, you’ll have to work them directly. Before we move on to more details about how to grow the abs purposefully, let’s first examine in what context this would be needed.

When choosing the needed context for direct ab growth (and conversely, the context in which such growth is NOT considered beneficial and is actually best avoided), we must remember that we are, with direct work, GROWING the abs. That is, your rectus abdominus muscles will actually be getting BIGGER. Which means that they pop out more and are more visible at any given bodyfat, but also means that they slightly expand the size of your waist, especially when viewed from the side.

So if you actually want bigger abs, then direct training for them is a great idea. If you already have a very slim waistline, don’t ever plan on getting massive and competing in bodybuilding, but just want your abs to “pop out” more, then this training is right up your alley! Because let’s face it, some of us get quite lean but have such small abs that even VERY low levels of bodyfat leave our abs looking unimpressive or even barely there. Some folks might be VERY content with just a flat stomach, but if you want your abs to pop, you might consider them for direct training. 

On the other hand, if you have aspirations to compete in physique sport, and especially if you’re either planning on getting very big eventually or you’re female and compete in Figure, then direct ab training might even be a net negative, as keeping your waist small must be a high priority for you. So before you start training your abs, consider your goals and then make an educated decision. 

If you’ve never trained abs on purpose before, your MEV will actually be around 2 weekly sets. If you’re experience in training abs, your MEV might be around 6 weekly sets.

MAV = Maximum Adaptive Volume:
The maximum adaptive volume of a single session of any trained muscle group is still speculative, but research suggests it’s probably no lower than 4 working sets per session and no higher than 12 working sets per session in most intermediates. When you design your program and progressions, having lots of sessions with much fewer than 4 working sets per muscle group per week for multiple weeks on end might not be very efficient, and you might benefit from combining a few of these lower volume sessions to get the same volume but in fewer weekly sessions. Also, not exceeding 12 sets per session per muscle group for more than a few weeks is probably a good idea.

MRV = Maximum Recoverable Volume:
Most people seem to encounter serious recovery problems above 25 sets per week, no matter how many sessions they split the work over. But some people can train far in excess of that amount and still be ok. The abs often develop a great resistance to fatigue with long term exposure to training. One way in which ab MRV becomes apparent is indirect. Sore and weak abs from too much training can reduce your stability and thus strength on other compound moves like squats and deads, leading to a system-wide MRV reduction even if the abs themselves are still growing. Those interested in pushing their ab training to the limit should consider starting with 2x frequency and working up to their MRVs, then consider going up in frequency every several mesocycles until they are training abs 4-6x a week for best results. 

EXERCISES
Hanging Knee Raise

Hanging Straight Leg Raise

Machine Crunch

Modified Candlestick

Reaching Situp

Rope Crunch

Slant Board Situp

V-Up


VARIATION
Within a training session, we recommend including between 1 and 3 different ab exercises, but no more than that in most cases, as doing more than 3 ab movements in one session is likely just a needless burning of potential exercise variations you can save for later mesocycles. Within a single week (microcycle) of training, we recommend between 2 and 5 different ab exercises. For example, if you train abs 3x a week, you can do a heavy machine crunch on one day, a lighter machine crunch on the next day, and a hanging knee raise on the last day for 2 total exercises in the week. On the other hand, if you train abs 6x per week, you might want to choose (though don’t have to choose) as many as 5 different exercises, with only one of them repeated in a heavier/lighter arrangement. Because you want to keep exercises variations fresh for when you need to change exercises (through injury or staleness, for example), you should use as few exercises per week (and thus, per mesocycle, as we recommend keeping the same exercises in every week of each meso) as you can to get the job done. If you can just do a few more sets of slant board sit-ups and get a great workout, there’s no reason to switch to machine crunches, for example. If you’re doing an exercise, there should be a reason for it.

Lastly, how do you know when it’s time to switch out a given exercise from your rotation to another exercise in your list of effective choices? The decision is based on answering just a few questions about the exercise you’re currently using:

Are you still making gains in rep strength on the exercise?
Is the exercise causing any aches or pains that are connective tissue related? And are these getting worse with each week or several weeks?
Is there a phasic need for the exercise to change? In other words, is the exercise appropriate for the rep range you’re trying to use it for? Example: unloaded situps can’t be trained in the 5-10 range once you’re strong enough, but machine loaded crunches can be. 
Are you getting a good mind-muscle connection on the exercise, or is it feeling stale and annoying to do?
If you are still hitting PRs on the exercise, it’s not causing any undue pains, you’re getting a good mind-muscle connection, and there’s no other need to change it, then don’t change it! If this means you keep an exercise around for up to a year or more, so be it! But if an exercise isn’t yielding any more PRs for a whole meso (especially on a muscle gain or maintenance phase), if it’s hurting you in the “bad” way, if it feels super stale, and/or if you have to dump it because it’s not appropriate to an upcoming rep range target, then you should replace it. Many times, the questions will fall on both sides, and then it’s up to you to make a wise choice considering all the 4 variables above. 

RANGE OF MOTION
People love to restrict ab range of motion. Why? Because it lets them avoid embarrassing themselves with how weak their abs really are. How many slant board situps can you do? Well, if we tell you that they only count if you lay all the way back and relaxed at the start of each rep and come up all the way so that your torso is past perpendicular to the ground, your answer might change from the one you were going to give originally. Stretch under load promotes growth, so really expand and fully contract your abs for best results. 

LOADING
In general, like all muscles, the abs benefit from weights in the 30%-85% 1RM range, which in many people roughly translates to a weight that results in between 5 and 30 reps on a first set taken to failure. We can split this range into heavy (5-10,) moderate (10-20), and light (20-30) categories, as there are tradeoffs to make between all of them.

The first point on loading is that the abs, like most muscles, seem to benefit from some training in all three of the rep ranges listed above. Because the moderate (10-20 rep) range often offers the best tradeoff between stimulus, fatigue, injury risk, slow/fast fiber specificity, and mind-muscle connection, an argument can be made that a first-time program design could have most weekly working sets for the abs in this range, perhaps up to about 50% of them. The other 50% can perhaps be split evenly between the heavy (5-10) and light (20-30) rep ranges, as loading range diversity has been shown to be a potential benefit in its own right. 

Not all exercises are optimally suited to all of the 3 main rep ranges. Crunches and sit-ups, if unweighted, often naturally fall in the 20-30 rep range. As a side note, it’s important to know that if you can do an ab exercise for more than a set of 30 reps to failure, it’s either time to start loading that exercise or to replace it with an exercise that is more challenging. Machine crunches fall in all of the ranges, and for most people, very challenging movements like the candlestick and V-Ups fall into the 5-10 range, though some moves might be very awkward in that heavy of a range and may be done lighter. When pairing the exercise to the rep range, just make sure you’re doing the exercise properly and not cutting any corners in technique or failure proximity to needlessly squeeze it into a range.

When constructing a weekly training plan, it’s probably a good idea to train the heavy ranges before the lighter ranges. Because both types of training cause fatigue, they all interfere with each other to some extent. However, the muscle and connective tissue damage from heavier training is likely more substantial and presents a higher risk of injury if some damage already exists from earlier training. Thus, if you do sets of 5-10 on Monday and (nearly always) sustain some form of micro-tearing, sets of 10-20 on Wednesday are lower in absolute force magnitude and are unlikely to cause the micro-tearing to expand into a notable injury. On the other hand, if you’re pre-damaged from lots of sets of 10-20 on Monday, going even heavier in such a state on Wednesday in the 5-10 range is a bit more likely to result in injury. Thus, a potential sequencing of heavy-moderate-light during the week might be advisable, with a day or two of extra rest after the light session and before the next heavy session to make sure most damage has been healed and another productive week can begin. 

A sample arrangement of exercises, sets, and loads can look something like this:

 	Exercise 	Sets	Reps
Mon

Modified Candlesticks

3

5-10

Wed

Reaching Situps 

6

10-20

Fri

Hanging Knee Raises 

3

20-30


Based on your personal responses to each of the main rep ranges, you can adjust how much volume you perform in any of them. For example, if you notice that you get a better stimulus (pumps, soreness, mind-muscle connection, etc.) and lower fatigue (joint stress, systemic fatigue, joint soreness, etc.) in some of the ranges vs. others, you can do more sets in those ranges and a bit less in others, though you should in most cases still include at least some work in the least productive ranges. For example, you might find that neither 5-10 nor 20-30 rep ranges work very well for your ab training, so you might only do a few sets of both in most weeks and do the vast majority of your sets in the 10-20 range. 

REST TIMES
When determining how long to rest between any two sets in training, our goal is for enough rest to be taken such that the next set is at least close to maximally productive. How can we ensure this? By answering 4 basic questions about our recovery status:

Has the target muscle locally recovered to do at least 5 reps on the next set?
Has the nervous system recovered enough to remove it as a limiting factor to target muscle performance?
Has the cardiorespiratory system recovered enough to remove it as a limiting factor to target muscle performance?
Have synergist muscles in the exercise being performed recovered enough to remove them as a limiting factor to target muscle performance?
It might take only 1-2 minutes to recover very well (let’s say, 90%) on all of those factors, but because set to set recovery is asymptotic in nature, it might take another 3 minutes to get to 95% recovery and another 10 minutes more to get to 99% recovery. Since you only have so much time to spend in the gym, 10 “90% recovered sets” in 45 minutes of training is a much more anabolic stimulus than only 3 “99% recovered” sets in that same amount of time. Thus, our recommendation is to make sure you can clearly check all 4 boxes of recovery above, but to not wait much longer than what can be considered “very good” recovery in the incredibly inefficient quest for “near perfect recovery.” 

Here’s an example of what can be considered “very good” recovery between sets of ab training. Before you do another set of candlesticks, ask yourself:

Are my abs still burning from the last set, or do they feel ok again?
Do I feel like I can contract hard with my abs again, and I am mentally ready for another hard set, or do I need more time to rest?
Is my breathing more or less back to normal, or is it still very heavy?
Are my forearms and lower back still very fatigued from supporting myself on the bench in a rigid posture, or are they ready to support my abs in the upcoming set of candlesticks?
If you can get the green light on all of these, you’re probably ready to do another set, and waiting much longer will almost certainly not be of benefit. 

You’ll notice that depending on the exercise and on the lifter, very different rest times will be generated by this questionnaire. For example, unweighted reaching sit-ups can be quite easy, and rest times can be less than 30 seconds, whereas machine crunches might need 2 minutes between sets just to regain normal breathing. And if you’re on the larger and stronger side of things, and your cardio isn’t great, you’ll be resting much longer than someone smaller, not as strong, and in excellent cardio shape. While average rest times between sets of ab training will be between 30 seconds and 2 minutes, the most important consideration is to take the rest time you need, and not copy someone else’s, rush the process, or sit around needlessly for minutes after all 4 factors are good to go for your next set to commence.   

FREQUENCY
There are two main considerations for determining training frequency. The first is the duration of the increase in muscle growth seen after a bout of training between MEV and MRV. If such an increase in muscle growth lasts 7 days, then perhaps a once a week frequency is optimal. If such an increase lasts only a day, then perhaps 6 days a week for the same muscle group is much better. While direct research on muscle growth timecourses is very limited, it seems that typical training might cause a reliable 24-48 hour increase in muscle growth. This would mean that if muscle growth elevation was the only variable of concern with regards to frequency, we should train every muscle 3-6 times per week. 

However, the second main consideration on determining training frequency is recovery. A single bout of training between MEV and MRV causes muscle growth to occur, but it also presents some degree of fatigue. If we are to progress in training and allow adaptations to fully take hold over days and weeks, we must allow enough time to elapse between overloading sessions for at least most fatigue to dissipate. On average, the exact amount of fatigue dissipation must be at least enough to allow performance to return to baseline or higher, such than an overload can be presented. In other words, if you can normally machine crunch 100 for 15 reps, asking yourself “when should my next ab workout be after this last one” can be answered by “when will you be recovered enough to be able to crunch at least 100 for 15 reps?” The timecourse of fatigue is usually a bit longer than that of muscle growth, unfortunately, so that for most people, recovery, not muscle growth cessation, will be the limiting factor on frequency. In most per-session MEV-MRV training volumes, fatigue will take between 1-2 days to come back down enough to restore or improve on past performance, and that highly depends on the muscle in question and even the exercises used. 

How do you determine what training frequency is appropriate for you? You can start by training your abs at per-session MEV volumes. After each session, you note when soreness has abated and when you feel recovered enough psychologically to attempt another overloading workout. When you’re ready, and no later, go back to the gym and train abs again, with volumes just a bit higher than MEV (using the RP Set Progression Algorithm). If you’re recovering on time, keep coming back and training your abs as often as you have been. If you notice that you need more time to recover, add a day to your next post-ab-training window. If you’re recovering faster than you thought you could, train a bit more often. After a mesocycle of such adjustments, you will have a rough but very good guess as to what your average ab training frequency can be for most of your programs going forward. In fact, your frequency will not only be tailored exactly to your responses, but you’ll be pretty sure it’s close to optimal because it was literally derived from how fast you can recover; which is the very primary variable that determines frequency. 

Just so that you have some expectation of where to start, most individuals can recover from ab training at a timecourse that allows for 3-6 sessions of abs per week at MEV-MRV volumes. However, only through direct experimentation on yourself can you tell where in this range is best for you and if maybe you’re even outside of this range. Just remember that so long as you’re recovered to train again (can perform at or above normal levels), training is a better idea than waiting to train, because higher frequency programs, at least in the short term, have shown to generate more muscle growth than needlessly lower ones. 

To improve your training frequency, you can alternate exercise selections between successive ab workouts. For example, if you do hanging leg raises on one day, you might do V-Ups or reaching situps the next day, and so on. This rotation of slightly different exercises and movement patterns can take repeated stress off of very small and specific parts of your muscles and connective tissues, which might reduce chronic injury risk exposure.

A note of caution on ab training frequency is that the abs support performance in all axially-loaded exercises, which is to say, a lot of common exercises! If you push the frequency and thus total volume very high on abs, you might have trouble in compound movements like squats, overhead presses, and deadlifts that rely heavily on abs for stability. Be careful and ease in to more ab training slowly, carefully monitoring your performance and stability on other muscle group exercises that rely on the abs.

PERIODIZATION
There are a few relevant timescales in periodization:

The repetition (1-9 seconds)
The set (5-30 repetitions)
The exercise (1-5 sets) 
The session (2-6 exercises)
The day (0-2 sessions)
The microcycle (usually 1 week of training)
The mesocycle (3-12 weeks)
The block (1-4 mesocycles)
The macrocycle (1-4 blocks)
We’ve already covered the most important details on most of these timescales, so in this section, we’ll focus on a brief understanding of how to manipulate training over a typical mesocycle and training block.

A mesocycle is composed of two phases: the accumulation phase and the deload phase. The accumulation phase lasts as long as it takes to hit systemic MRV, which, because fatigue accumulates in MEV+ training, has to happen at some point. For beginners with very high recovery abilities, it can take up to 12 weeks of increasingly more demanding training for systemic MRV to be reached and a deload to be required. For very advanced lifters that have very strong, large, and volume-resistant muscles, it can take only 3-4 weeks of accumulation training to reach systemic MRV and need to deload. The deload phase is designed to bring down the fatigue from the accumulation phase, and it usually only lasts a week or so (one microcycle).

When you begin a mesocycle of training, you should probably begin at or close to your MEV for all the muscle groups you’d like to improve during that mesocycle, for reasons described extensively in our book on the subject of training volume. Week to week, you can manipulate working sets by using the Set Progression algorithm from the Training Volume Landmarks for Muscle Growth article. You should seek to keep reps stable from week to week while letting your RIR decline from a 3 or 4 RIR start until it gets down to 0 (for exercises that don’t threaten the bar falling on you) or 1 (for those that do) in the last week of training. The way you keep the reps stable as RIR falls is by adding weight to the exercises you’re using. How much weight to add is a matter of an educated guess on your part. You want to add enough weight to get your target RIR with the same reps as last week. For example, if you did 100lbs last week for 10 reps on your first set of an exercise at 2 RIR, how much should you do next week to get 10 reps again but at 1 RIR? Well, you might think that adding 2.5lbs would be too easy, and you could honestly get 11 reps with that next week at 1 RIR, but adding 10lbs might require you to push to 0 RIR to get 10 reps, so you would just add 5lbs and that will probably take you where you need to be. If you’re making very rapid gains on an exercise, you might have a few weeks here and there where even though you increased weight by a bit, your RIR didn’t decline. You might have hit 8 reps at 100lbs at 3 RIR last week, and then hit 8 reps again at 3 RIR with 105lbs this week! This is a good thing, and lots of these weeks are how beginners can sometimes crank out up to 12 weeks of accumulation. Since getting to failure too soon is MUCH WORSE than getting there a bit slower, we recommend being conservative on nearly all weekly weight additions.

If you can’t realistically add weight, you can add reps. This might happen when, for example, you are using the 25lb dumbbells one week and then having to do the 30lbers next week, wildly slashing your reps. Just remember to stay within your general rep range and not leave it in any given meso. If you start at sets of about 5 reps, don’t add any more reps than will give you sets of 10, because that will take you out of the 5-10 range and no longer fulfill the needs of your training program in the way it was intended. If you start to exit a range by adding reps, add weight to take yourself back into that range, even if the increments are big and take you all the way down to the bottom of the range. Yes, this might mean that last week you were doing 20 reps with the 20lb dumbbells on your first set, and this week you’re back to only 10 reps with the 25lbers at the same or one less RIR, but that’s proper training!

Once you cannot tie previous reps in at least two consecutive sessions for a given muscle group, you have likely hit its local MRV, and need to reduce its training volume. Our recommendation is to take the next planned session with half of the planned working sets, half of the planned reps, and half of the load for recovery. In the session after, resume your load progression from before, but start at a number of sets halfway between where you started the meso and your MRV set number, and an RIR of around 2. Thus, for example, if you hit 100lbs for 10 reps on a first set last session (6 total sets in the session for that muscle group), whereas the week before, you hit 95lbs for 12 reps, your next workout can be 50lbs for 3 sets of about 5 reps. Then, next week, you resume with 105lbs, but shoot for 2 RIR and do 4 sets total, because you started the meso at 2 sets, and 4 is halfway between 2 and 6 sets. Continue to train normally after that until and unless you hit MRV again.

Systemic MRV is when you’re training so hard that your desire to train plummets, your sleep quality declines, your appetite falls, and you might get sick more often. It’s also when nearly all of your muscles start to hit local MRVs at about the same time. Once that happens (and be honest with yourself when it does), stop the accumulation phase and begin the deload phase.

The deload can be done many ways, but our recommendation is to take sets to MEV for the whole week. The load should be week 1’s load for the first half of the week and ½ of week 1’s load for the second half. The reps should be roughly half of all week 1’s reps for all sets during the deload week. This makes the deload VERY EASY, which is the whole point, since hard training doesn’t bring down fatigue! You should feel refreshed and be craving hard training toward the end of your deload week if you’re setting it up correctly. 

Those are the basics of periodization over the mesocycle. The training block is a sequence of mesocycles strung together for one unifying purpose. For example, a muscle gain block may be 3 mesocycles of 6 weeks each, one after another, with weight gain the goal for all 18 of those total weeks, or a fat loss block might be 2 mesocycles of 5 weeks long during which weight loss is the goal for all 10 of those weeks.

Though we can potentially alter all training variables over a training block, frequency, exercise selection, and loading are definitely noteworthy.

Frequency Periodization

When you start a training block, your MEVs are very low and so are your weekly MRVs. Thus, you can fit your total training volume relatively easily into lower frequencies, such as 2x per week per muscle group, for example. As training progresses and you start your next meso, not only do your per-session MEVs go up, but your weekly MRVs go up as well, making fitting all your training into just a few sessions more difficult. As well, you’re now quite used to the exercises, and recovery between sessions occurs much faster, allowing a higher frequency microcycle to be much more realistic. At this point, you can increase your frequency a bit, perhaps to an average of something like 3x per muscle group, for example. In the last one or two mesos, your per-session MEVs are very high and your per-week MRVs even higher. To really get the best gains, another bump in frequency is recommended, and you might go to 4x or so training per muscle group, and perhaps even higher. 

Unfortunately, super high frequencies might not be the most sustainable for a couple of reasons. First, muscles heal faster than connective tissues, and if you train with very high frequencies, sometimes your connective tissue recovery can lag behind your muscle recovery, which may set you up for injuries if unabated. Secondly, the sheer weekly volume that higher frequencies let you do productively might cause so much fatigue escalation as to not be sustainable for longer than a mesocycle or two. Thus, after training for a meso or two at your highest frequency, you might end the training block and seek to reduce the very high fatigue levels you have accumulated, in part by starting whatever phase you start next at lower frequencies.

Exercise Selection Periodization

For normal exercise selection decisions, you can just follow the 4-part exercise deletion and replacement guidelines in the variation section above. But as you add sessions from meso to meso with a climbing frequency, you’ll need to consider adding exercises. Yes, you can repeat exercises a few times in the week with different loads, but we recommend doing this sparingly, and more often adding in new exercises when you add new sessions as frequency climbs. Thus, you might start with an exercise on Monday and a different one on Thursday in a 2x meso, but when you move to 3x, you might have to add a new exercise on Friday, keeping the Monday exercise the same and moving the Thursday exercise to Wednesday. Because fatigue and wear and tear increase with each meso in a block, we recommend adding less systemically disruptive exercises more often than adding more disruptive ones. For example, you might consider adding some reaching situps on that Friday 3x session but adding machine weighted crunches to an already fatiguing week of ab training might be overkill. Yes, you can add very tough movements as you go, but we recommend against it in most cases. Thus, you start with pretty much only or mostly basic, high-stress moves such as candlesticks and machine weighted crunches earlier in the block, and later on add v-ups, reaching situps, and other such less fatiguing exercises as you add in sessions to expand frequency over the training block.

Loading Periodization

Whatever exercises you’ve carried over from one meso to the next should be done in the same rep ranges as they were done in the last mesos. For example, if you did candlesticks in the 5-10 rep range on a first set in the last meso, in the next meso, you should continue your loading progression to stay in that same rep range, which often means just adding small increments of weight from where you last left off in the last meso, or lightening up the weight just enough to get similar reps at 3-4 RIR again in the first week. But for new exercises added in each meso as frequency goes up, we recommend adding in the moderate (10-20) and light (20-30) rep ranges instead of the heavy (5-10) range. This recommendation occurs for two reasons. First, as you take on more wear and tear and fatigue, adding more 5-10 rep movements might cause a large increase in injury risk, especially now that you’re asking your body to perform with such heavy loads with even less recovery time between sessions. Secondly, very high rep (20-30) training seems to cause robust gains over a meso or two, but in part because your body adapts to buffering metabolites so quickly, might not work nearly as well for much longer. Thus, you may want to start with heavier training in the first meso of a block, keep it for all remaining mesos, and add in lighter training with new sessions as you go, which also pairs well with the selection of less fatiguing exercises. Here’s an example of how that might look for the abs:

 	Meso 1	Meso 2	Meso 3
Mon

Candlesticks: 5-10

Candlesticks: 5-10

Candlesticks: 5-10 

Wed

x

Machine Weighted Crunches: 10-20

Machine Weighted Crunches: 10-20

Thurs

Machine Weighted Crunches: 10-20

x

x

Fri

x

Reaching Situps: 10-20

Reaching Situps: 10-20 

Sat

x

 	
V-ups: 20-30


Once you’ve done a whole training block, you can do a mesocycle of low frequency (2x) training at MV with mostly 5-10 rep ranges and compound movements to resensitize your muscles to volume and growth again. This meso can take about a month and can be good to pair with maintenance eating to bring down any diet fatigue you might have from hard dieting in the last block. If you don’t have any real diet fatigue, you can instead take around 2 weeks of active rest (sometimes just one week if you count the deload after your last meso), where you train with 1x frequency for every muscle, with only about 2 working sets per muscle per session, and with weights that are around 50% of your 5-10 range, but doing them for only 5-10 reps per set. This ultra-easy training can make you ready for another whole block of training in the gym and can even be replaced with no training at all if you’re feeling really beat up or tired. Once you’ve taken this easy time, you’re probably ready to give another training block a go!

TRAINING MODALITIES
Straight Sets

Straight sets are sets performed to 0-4 RIR, with enough rest time to recover all 4 limiting factors (see the rest time section above for details).

Very effective for abs, especially for loaded exercises such as machine crunches and weighted situps.

Down Sets

Down sets are straight sets, but with less weight (usually 10-20% less) than the previous straight sets. By lowering the weight, you can keep reps over 5 per set, and/or keep the mind-muscle connection high and keep technique excellent to continue to have a high stimulus to fatigue ratio in every set of that exercise.  

Can be an option with weighted moves, but not very commonly used for the abs, as they tend to recover very quickly from each set and usually don’t run into the 5 rep range too often.

Controlled Eccentrics and Pauses

Concentric, eccentric, and isometric phases of each exercise can be between half a second and 3 seconds long and still confer near-optimal effects on hypertrophy. In some cases, slowing down eccentrics and extending pauses can enhance technique, mind-muscle connection, and safety of the exercise.

Going for a super deep stretch, a super slow eccentric, and squeezing the peak contraction are excellent ideas for ab training, and can actually be the default way to train abs, as opposed to with conventional cadence. One of the reasons for this is that if you get into “rep cranking mode” with the abs, you often just end up doing a lot of hip flexor work, which is cool, but isn’t the target. For best ab stimulus, your actual spine needs to flex and extend, which is much easier to do if you slow down the movements and make them more technically focused.

Giant Sets 

Giant sets give you a certain weight to lift, an RIR range to hit (usually 0-4 RIR), and a goal of total reps over as many sets as it takes. An example is aiming to do 100lbs for however many sets it takes to get 60 total reps, while taking normal rest between each set. Such an approach can take the focus off of having to match or exceed the per-set reps you did last week, and can thus let you super-focus on technique and the mind-muscle connection, thus potentially improving both and getting more out of the training with exercises that can demand lots of technique and mind-muscle connection to be effective. If you’d like to be super precise in counting sets for your volume landmarks, we recommend counting giant sets at 2/3 of the contribution of straight sets, such that if you did 6 total sets to get to your giant set rep target, you can count that as 4 sets of “straight set equivalency” in terms of stimulus and fatigue. This discount is because with a higher focus on technique and mind-muscle connection and a lower focus on getting as many reps per set as possible, giant sets likely don’t cause as much fatigue as straight sets.

Excellent for making sure your technique and mind-muscle connection are on point, especially for exercises like candlesticks, in which just a small alteration in technique can cause big rep differences.

Myoreps

Myoreps are just like straight sets in that they must check all 4 recovery boxes before doing another set. However, they are different in two ways. First, while the first set is usually between 10-20 reps (0-2 RIR), the next multiple sets only rest long enough to get between 5 and 10 reps each. This is to maximize the ratio of effective (near-failure) reps to total reps over the multiple sets. Secondly, for all of those successive sets to register the highest number of effective reps per set, the local recovery factor (the muscle itself) must be by far the most limiting, so that successive sets are not limited by the nervous system, the lungs, and other muscles, allowing the final reps of each set to recruit and tense the fastest and most growth-prone motor units. For this to be possible, only isolation exercises without limiting synergists are appropriate for myoreps. If you’d like to be super precise in counting sets for your volume landmarks, we recommend counting myorep sets each as the equivalent of a straight set. While they do have fewer reps, they are often taken closer to failure and thus turn out to be about as fatiguing. 

Because ab training usually has no real limiting synergists in most exercises, myoreps are very well-suited for it. They can be put to great use in exercises like V-Ups, which might be tough to load very heavily, but easy to do myoreps with and still get excellent faster-fiber stimulation.

Drop Sets

Drop sets are exactly like myoreps, but with even shorter rest times because weight is reduced by 10-20% on average between each set. The effects are very similar. The advantage of drop sets is their time saving, and their slight disadvantage over myoreps is that dropping the weight a lot can reduce mind-muscle connection via reducing tension perception. If you’d like to be super precise in counting sets for your volume landmarks, we recommend counting drop sets each as the equivalent of a straight set. While they do have fewer reps and lighter loads, they are often taken closer to failure and in such rapid and painful succession that they turn out to be about as fatiguing.

An excellent choice for abs. Can easily be done at the end of machine crunches and weighted ab movements by reducing or dumping the load altogether and cranking out at least another set of reps!  

Pre-Exhaust Supersets

These supersets begin with an isolation exercise for a given muscle group, and with no rest after taking it to 0-2 RIR, end with a compound exercise to which the target muscle is a big contributor. The local pre-exhaust of the isolation exercise allows the target muscle to be by far the limiting factor for the compound exercise that follows, and lets it be exposed to a few more effective reps than it otherwise would be if that compound was done fresh. After each 2-exercise superset, 4-factor rest is again taken until the next 2-exercise superset begins. If you’d like to be super precise in counting sets for your volume landmarks, we recommend counting pre-exhaust supersets as 1.5x as the equivalent of a straight set. This is because the compound exercise done in the second part of the set is only limited (highly) by the target pre-exhausted muscle, and this isn’t nearly as fatiguing, especially systemically, as it would be if it were done fresh.

Though you can pre-exhaust abs for more compound exercises (like machine abs to weighted plank holds), this is not commonly done, as there really are a shortage of truly compound exercises for the abs, and no shortage of easily-targeted isolation moves. 

Occlusion Sets

Occlusion training is myorep training with the limb occluded just above the muscle. This occlusion causes the local muscle and nerve to be far and away the limiting factors on recovery between sets, and thus allows you to focus in on a target muscle group that might have otherwise been difficult to reach with non-occluded movements. The big benefit is time saving, because rest between occluded sets is only long enough to get another 5 reps, and you can also use weights at the very low end of the growth range and even a bit lower (20-30% 1RM). The downside is that the local vasculature adapts very quickly to occlusion, so it might not be very effective for any more than a mesocycle or two in a row. Also, some muscles are much harder than others to occlude, or even impossible to occlude. If you’d like to be super precise in counting sets for your volume landmarks, we recommend counting occlusion sets each as the equivalent of 2/3 of a straight set, as they cause much less systemic fatigue due to the lower reps and weights used.

Occluding the abs is unfortunately pretty close to impossible, so it’s not a realistic option. 

BACK GROWTH TRAINING TIPS

Updated: Nov 25, 2019

The following are some helpful tips for your back training. Please note that these are averages based on our personal training experience and that accrued through training thousands of clients over the course of many years. The recommendations here should be food for thought or places to start, not dogmatic scriptures to follow to the letter.

Likewise, before we dive into the training tips themselves, let's also review our key training volume landmarks and relate them to training the back: 

MV = Maintenance Volume:
A good approximation is that 6 sets per week are needed to keep back gains from slipping away. That should probably be split pretty evenly between vertical and horizontal pulling movements.  We recommend 2 weekly sessions for maintenance - so, 3 sets per session - but you can probably get away with one weekly back session for 6 sets and still maintain in an isocaloric state. Or, up to 3 sessions at 2 sets each should work as well. 

MEV = Minimum Effective Volume:
Most intermediate-advanced lifters need at least 10 sets of direct back work per week to make gains, and possibly more for some. If you’re training 2x / week, that’s about 5 sets per session. 3x / week training requires 3-4 sets per session, 4x / week: 2-3 sets, while 5-6x / week training necessitates 2 or so sets.

MAV = Maximum Adaptive Volume:
Maximum adaptive volume of a single session of any trained muscle group is still speculative, but research suggests it’s probably no lower than 4 working sets per session, and no higher than 12 working sets per session in most intermediates. When you design your program and progressions, having lots of sessions with much fewer than 4 working sets per muscle group per week for multiple weeks might not be very efficient. Alternatively, you might benefit from combining a few of these lower volume sessions to get the same volume in fewer weekly sessions. Also, not exceeding 12 sets per session per muscle group for more than a few weeks is probably a good idea.

MRV = Maximum Recoverable Volume:
MRV depends highly on the number of sessions per week. With 2 sessions, the average intermediate MRV for back might be around 20 sets per week. With three sessions, it’s closer to 25 sets per week. With 4 sessions, it’s around 30 sets, and with 5 or 6 weekly sessions, it might be as high as 35 sets per week in many cases. Especially those who are both well trained and still relatively light can often handle pretty high volumes.

All of these volume guidelines are for the combination of vertical and horizontal pulling exercises. Thus, when we say that with 4 back sessions a week typical MRVs are around 30 total sets, we generally mean about 15 sets of vertical pulling and 15 sets of rowing, not 30 sets of each!

EXERCISES
Because “the back” isn’t a muscle or even several muscles but rather a large assortment of adjacent muscles, it’s best to think of back training by splitting it up into the exercises that require horizontal pulling and those that require vertical pulling.

Horizontal Pulling: 

Vertical Pulling:

Barbell Bent Over Row

Cambered Bar Row

Barbell Row to Chest

Underhand EZ Bar Row

Smith Machine Row

Chest Supported Row

Machine Chest Supported Row

T Bar Row

Incline Dumbbell Row

Two Arm Dumbbell Row  

Single Arm Dumbbell Row

Hammer Low Row

Inverted Row

Seal Row

Seated Cable Row

 

Normal Grip Pullup

Wide Grip Pullup

Parallel Grip Pullup

Underhand Pullup

Assisted Normal Grip Pullup

Assisted Wide Grip Pullup

Assisted Parallel Pullup

Assisted Underhand Pullup

Normal Grip Pulldown

Wide Grip Pulldown

Parallel Pulldown

Underhand Pulldown

Narrow Grip Pulldown

Hammer High Row

Dumbbell Pullover

Machine Pullover

Straight Arm Pulldown


VARIATION
What makes back a bit different from most other muscle groups is that it needs both vertical and horizontal stimulus within each microcycle. As a simple example, if you train back twice a week, you should focus most of your exercises on one of those days in the horizontal plane, and in the vertical plane on the other day. What you can also do is include some of the alternate focus exercises in each session, but do them at the end of the session and for less weight and/or volume. This way, both vertical and horizontal components are hit each session, but each is prioritized one time and gets to recover a bit more the next. Here’s an example:

Monday	Thursday
Barbell Bent Rows: 6 sets of 10

Pullups Weighted: 6 sets of 6

Pulldowns: 3 sets of 15

Machine Rows: 3 sets of 10

We typically recommend including between one and three different back exercises in any given training session, as more than three is likely to cut into potential exercise variations that are better saved for later mesocycles. Within a single week (microcycle) of training, we recommend between two and five different back exercises. For example, if you train back 3x a week, you can do a heavy barbell row on one day, a lighter barbell row on the next day, and a pullup version on the last day for two total exercises in the week. On the other hand, if you train back 6x per week, you might want to choose as many as five different exercises, repeating only one of them in a heavier/lighter arrangement. Because you want to keep exercises variations fresh for when you need to change exercises (due to injury or staleness, for example), you should use as few exercises per week as possible to get the job done. Our recommendation to repeat the same exercises for every week of a given meso is further reason to get a great workout from a few more sets of barbell rows, vs switching to dumbbell rows, for example. If you’re doing an exercise, there should be a reason for it.

Lastly, how do you know when it’s time to swap out an exercise for a comparably effective one on your list? These questions about the exercise you’re considering swapping out can help:

Are you still making gains in rep strength on the exercise?
Is the exercise causing any aches or pains that are connective tissue related? And are these getting worse with each week or accumulating over multiple weeks?
Is there a phasic need for the exercise to change? In other words, is the exercise appropriate for the rep range you’re trying to use it for? Example: barbell rows for sets of 25 just tire out your lower back, but machine rows for 25 pump up your upper back as intended. 
Are you getting a good mind-muscle connection on the exercise, or is it feeling stale and annoying to do?
If you are still hitting PRs on the exercise, it’s not causing any undue pains, you’re getting a good mind-muscle connection, and there’s no other need to change it, then don’t change it! If this means you keep an exercise around for up to a year or more, so be it! But, if an exercise isn’t yielding any more PRs for a whole meso (especially on a muscle gain or maintenance phase), hurting you beyond expected soreness, feels super stale, or is inappropriate for an upcoming rep range target, then you should replace it. Many times, the questions will fall on both sides, and then it’s up to you to make a wise choice considering all the 4 variables above.

RANGE OF MOTION
Not only is it important to do full range of motion for full development on back moves, it’s also important to prevent cheating with momentum. Of all the bent rows ever done to date on this earth, maybe only about 5% of them were likely done with good technique. The rest were done with some - and often an unacceptably high - degree of swinging.  Remember, the only thing you get from swinging is the involvement of your legs. Unless you’re training legs and back with one exercise (aka "the deadlift"!), you shouldn't be moving your torso up and down to help you lift. Also, the lats seem to respond well to peak contractions, so bring that pulldown bar all the way down to your chest with each rep. Yes: you’ll have to lose some weight off the stack, but if you’re there to impress yourself with your strength, do it in the power rack, not the lat pulldown machine! And, you’ll also see lots of people doing pullups with only the mid-range, never going down to a dead hang or coming up all the way to at least get their chins over the bar. While this can be quite rewarding for the ego, sadly the same isn't true for your back musculature, making this largely unproductive move one to skip. 

LOADING
In general, like all muscles, the muscles of the back benefit from weights in the 30%-85% 1RM range, which in many people roughly translates to a weight that results in between 5 and 30 reps on a first set taken to failure. We can split this range into heavy (5-10,) moderate (10-20), and light (20-30) categories, and inspect the tradeoffs inherent in each.

The first point on loading is that the back, like most muscles, seems to benefit from some training in all three of the rep ranges listed above. Because the moderate (10-20 rep) range often offers the best tradeoff between stimulus, fatigue, injury risk, slow/fast fiber specificity, and mind-muscle connection, an argument can be made that a first-time program design could have most weekly working sets for the back in this range, perhaps up to about 50% of them. The other 50% can perhaps be split evenly between the heavy (5-10) and light (20-30) rep ranges, as loading range diversity has been shown to be a potential benefit in its own right. 

While the 10-20 range can support nearly all types of exercises, the other ranges have some practical delineations. For example, weighted pullups should probably be done in the 5-10 range and not much higher, as the whole point of weighting pullups is to impose greater absolute forces. On the other hand, barbell bent rows and other back movements that require support of the body in a gravity-resistant posture may not be ideal for the 20-30 rep range. This is because the duration of such a set may fatigue supporting muscles before the pulling muscles themselves are fatigued, thus preventing true failure proximity and best gains in those targeted pulling muscles. This suggests that exercises like barbell rows and weighted pullups may be most beneficial in the 5-20 ranges, while pulldowns, machine rows and the like may be most beneficial in the 10-30 rep ranges.

When constructing a weekly training plan, it’s probably a good idea to train the heavy ranges before the lighter ranges. Because both types of training cause fatigue, they interfere with each other to some extent. However, the muscle and connective tissue damage from heavier training is likely more substantial, and hence presents a higher risk for injury when coupled with damage from earlier training. Thus, if you do sets of 5-10 on Monday and (nearly always) sustain some form of micro-tearing, sets of 10-20 on Wednesday are lower in absolute force magnitude, and are unlikely to cause the micro-tearing to expand into a notable injury. On the other hand, if you’re pre-damaged from lots of sets of 10-20 on Monday, going even heavier in such a state on Wednesday in the 5-10 range may be more likely to result in injury. Thus, a potential sequencing of heavy-moderate-light during the week might be advisable, with a day or two of extra rest between the light session and the following heavy session. This rest interval allows you to go enter a new, productive week of training, with most of the previous week's damage healed. 

A sample arrangement of exercises, sets, and loads can look something like this:

Monday	Wednesday	Friday
Barbell Rows: 2 sets, 5-10 reps	Unweighted Pullups: 4 sets, 10-20 reps	Machine Rows: 2 sets, 20-30 reps
Weighted Pullups: 2 sets, 5-10 reps 	Barbell Rows 4 sets:  10-20 reps	Underhand Pulldowns: 2 sets, 20-30 reps

Based on your personal responses to each of the main rep ranges, you can adjust the volume you use for any of them. For example, if you notice that you get a better stimulus (pumps, soreness, mind-muscle connection, etc.) and lower fatigue (joint stress, systemic fatigue, joint soreness, etc.) in some of the ranges vs. others, you can do more sets in those ranges and fewer in others. That said, in most cases you should still include at least some work in the least productive ranges. For example, you might find that neither 5-10 nor 20-30 rep ranges work very well for your back training, so you might only do a few sets of both in most weeks, and do the vast majority of your sets in the 10-20 range.  

REST TIMES
When determining how long to rest between any two sets in training, our goal is to get enough rest to allow for the next set to be as close as possible to maximally productive. How can we ensure this? By answering 4 basic questions about our recovery status:

Has the target muscle locally recovered enough to do at least 5 reps on the next set?
Has the nervous system recovered enough to remove it as a limiting factor to target muscle performance?
Has the cardiorespiratory system recovered enough to remove it as a limiting factor to target muscle performance?
Have synergist muscles in the exercise being performed recovered enough to remove them as a limiting factors to target muscle performance?
It might take only 1-2 minutes to recover very well (let’s say, 90%) on all of those systems, but, because set to set recovery is asymptotic in nature, it might take another 3 minutes to get to 95% recovery and another 10 minutes to get to 99% recovery. Since you only have so much time to spend in the gym, 10 “90% recovered sets” in 45 minutes of training is a much more anabolic stimulus than only 3 “99% recovered” sets in that same amount of time. Thus, our recommendation is to make sure you can clearly check all 4 recovery boxes above, but not wait around for “near perfect recovery.” 

Here’s an example of what can be considered “very good” recovery between sets of back training. Before you do another set of bent rows, ask yourself:

Is my upper back still burning from the last set, or has pain dissipated?
Do I feel like I can pull hard with my upper back again, and I am mentally ready for another hard set, or do I need more time to rest?
Is my breathing more or less back to normal, or is it still very heavy?
Are my forearms and biceps still very fatigued, or are they ready to support my upper back in the upcoming set of barbell rows?
If all of the above are clear for takeoff, you’re probably ready to do another set, and waiting much longer is highly unlikely to be of benefit. 

You’ll notice that, depending on the exercise and on the lifter, very different rest times will be generated by this questionnaire. For example, straight arm lat pulldowns might not even have synergist muscles, so question 4 doesn’t even apply, whereas barbell rows might need 3 minutes between sets just to regain normal breathing. And, if you’re on the larger and stronger side, but your cardio isn’t great, you’ll be resting much longer than someone smaller, weaker, but in excellent cardio shape. While average rest times between sets of back training will be between one and three minutes, the most important consideration is to take the rest time you need, never copying someone else’s, rushing yourself, or sitting around needlessly once all four metrics indicate that you're ready to start your next set.     

FREQUENCY
There are two main considerations for determining training frequency. The first is the duration of the increase in muscle growth after a bout of training between MEV and MRV. If such an increase in muscle growth continues for seven days, then perhaps a 1x / week frequency is optimal. If such an increase lasts only a day, then perhaps 6x / week for the same muscle group is much better. While direct research on muscle growth timecourses is very limited, it seems that typical training might cause a reliable 24-48 hour increase in muscle growth. This would mean that, if muscle growth elevation was the only variable of concern with regards to frequency, we should train every muscle 3-6 times per week. 

However, the second main consideration for determining training frequency is recovery. A single bout of training between MEV and MRV causes muscle growth to occur, but also presents some degree of fatigue. If we are to progress in training and allow adaptations to fully take hold over days and weeks, we must allow enough time to elapse between overloading sessions for most of our fatigue to dissipate. On average, the exact amount of fatigue dissipation must be at least enough to allow performance to return to baseline or higher, so an overload can be presented. In other words, if you can normally barbell row 185 for 15 reps, your next workout for this muscle group should take place when you're recovered enough to once again row at least 185 for 15 reps. Unfortunately, the timecourse of fatigue is usually a bit longer than that of muscle growth, making recovery, not muscle growth cessation, the limiting factor on frequency for most. In most per-session MEV-MRV training volumes, fatigue will take between one and four days to come back down enough to restore or improve on past performance, though this is highly dependent on the muscle and the specific exercises in question. 

How do you determine what training frequency is appropriate for you? You can start by training your back at per-session MEV volumes. After each session, note when soreness has abated, and you feel recovered enough psychologically to attempt another overloading workout. When you’re ready - but no later - train back again, with volumes just a bit higher than MEV (using the RP Set Progression Algorithm which you can reference here). If you’re recovering on time, keep coming back and training your back as often as you have been. If you notice that you need more time to recover, add a day to your next post-back training window. If you’re recovering faster than you thought you could, train a bit more often. After a mesocycle of such adjustments, you will have a rough but very good guess about your average back training frequency for most of your future programs. In fact, your frequency will not only be tailored exactly to your muscle growth responses, but you can be pretty sure it’s close to optimal when it is derived from your recovery time: the primary variable that should determine frequency. 

Just so that you have some expectation of where to start, most of us can recover from back training at a timecourse that allows for 2-4 back training sessions per week at MEV-MRV volumes. However, only through direct experimentation on yourself can you tell where in this range works best for you, or if your ideal frequency falls outside of it altogether. Just remember that, so long as you’re recovered to train again (aka, able to perform at or above normal levels), training is a better idea than waiting to train, because higher frequency programs, at least in the short term, have shown to generate more muscle growth than needlessly lower ones. 

To improve your training frequency, you can alternate areas of focus and exercise selections between successive back workouts. For example, you might train mostly rows and very few vertical pulls on one day, and, on the next back day, you might train mostly vertical pulls and very few rows. This way, you’re allowing rows and vertical pulls to recover a bit more between back sessions, but you’re still getting a lot of back sessions in during the week, which probably means more growth. Because different exercises stress slightly different pools of motor units, which are fractions of your whole muscle, varying specific exercises is also a wise move, especially for higher frequencies. For example, if you do overhand pullups on one day for your vertical component, you might do underhand pullups or parallel pulldowns for your vertical component the next day, and so on. This rotation of slightly different exercises and movement patterns can also take repeated stress off of very small and specific parts of your muscles and connective tissues, which might reduce chronic injury risk exposure.  

PERIODIZATION
There are a few relevant timescales in periodization:

The repetition (1-9 seconds)
The set (5-30 repetitions)
The exercise (1-5 sets) 
The session (2-6 exercises)
The day (0-2 sessions)
The microcycle (usually 1 week of training)
The mesocycle (3-12 weeks)
The block (1-4 mesocycles)
The macrocycle (1-4 blocks)
We’ve already covered the most important details on most of these timescales, so in this section, we’ll focus on a brief understanding of how to manipulate training over a typical mesocycle and training block.

A mesocycle is composed of two phases: the accumulation phase and the deload phase. The accumulation phase lasts as long as it takes to hit systemic MRV, which, because fatigue accumulates in MEV+ training, has to happen at some point. For beginners with very high recovery abilities, it can take up to 12 weeks of increasingly more demanding training for systemic MRV to be reached and a deload to be required. For very advanced lifters that have very strong, large, and volume-resistant muscles, it can take only 3-4 weeks of accumulation training to reach systemic MRV and need to deload. The deload phase is designed to bring down the fatigue from the accumulation phase, and it usually only lasts a week or so (one microcycle).

When you begin a mesocycle of training, you should probably begin at or close to your MEV for all the muscle groups you’d like to improve during that mesocycle, for reasons described extensively in our book on the subject of training volume. Week to week, you can manipulate working sets by using the Set Progression algorithm from the Training Volume Landmarks for Muscle Growth article. You should seek to keep reps stable from week to week while letting your RIR decline from a 3 or 4 RIR start until it gets down to 0 (for exercises that don’t threaten the bar falling on you) or 1 (for those that do) in the last week of training. The way you keep the reps stable as RIR falls is by adding weight to the exercises you’re using. How much weight to add is a matter of an educated guess on your part. You want to add enough weight to get your target RIR with the same reps as last week. For example, if you did 100lbs last week for 10 reps on your first set of an exercise at 2 RIR, how much should you do next week to get 10 reps again but at 1 RIR? Well, you might think that adding 2.5lbs would be too easy, and you could honestly get 11 reps with that next week at 1 RIR, but adding 10lbs might require you to push to 0 RIR to get 10 reps, so you would just add 5lbs and that will probably take you where you need to be. If you’re making very rapid gains on an exercise, you might have a few weeks here and there where even though you increased weight by a bit, your RIR didn’t decline. You might have hit 8 reps at 100lbs at 3 RIR last week, and then hit 8 reps again at 3 RIR with 105lbs this week! This is a good thing, and lots of these weeks are how beginners can sometimes crank out up to 12 weeks of accumulation. Since getting to failure too soon is MUCH WORSE than getting there a bit slower, we recommend being conservative on nearly all weekly weight additions.

If you can’t realistically add weight, you can add reps. This might happen when, for example, you are using the 25lb dumbbells one week and then having to do the 30lbers next week, wildly slashing your reps. Just remember to stay within your general rep range and not leave it in any given meso. If you start at sets of about 5 reps, don’t add any more reps than will give you sets of 10, because that will take you out of the 5-10 range and no longer fulfill the needs of your training program in the way it was intended. If you start to exit a range by adding reps, add weight to take yourself back into that range, even if the increments are big and take you all the way down to the bottom of the range. Yes, this might mean that last week you were doing 20 reps with the 20lb dumbbells on your first set, and this week you’re back to only 10 reps with the 25lbers at the same or one less RIR, but that’s proper training!

Once you cannot tie previous reps in at least two consecutive sessions for a given muscle group, you have likely hit its local MRV, and need to reduce its training volume. Our recommendation is to take the next planned session with half of the planned working sets, half of the planned reps, and half of the load for recovery. In the session after, resume your load progression from before, but start at a number of sets halfway between where you started the meso and your MRV set number, and an RIR of around 2. Thus, for example, if you hit 100lbs for 10 reps on a first set last session (6 total sets in the session for that muscle group), whereas the week before, you hit 95lbs for 12 reps, your next workout can be 50lbs for 3 sets of about 5 reps. Then, next week, you resume with 105lbs, but shoot for 2 RIR and do 4 sets total, because you started the meso at 2 sets, and 4 is halfway between 2 and 6 sets. Continue to train normally after that until and unless you hit MRV again.

Systemic MRV is when you’re training so hard that your desire to train plummets, your sleep quality declines, your appetite falls, and you might get sick more often. It’s also when nearly all of your muscles start to hit local MRVs at about the same time. Once that happens (and be honest with yourself when it does), stop the accumulation phase and begin the deload phase.

The deload can be done many ways, but our recommendation is to take sets to MEV for the whole week. The load should be week 1’s load for the first half of the week and ½ of week 1’s load for the second half. The reps should be roughly half of all week 1’s reps for all sets during the deload week. This makes the deload VERY EASY, which is the whole point, since hard training doesn’t bring down fatigue! You should feel refreshed and be craving hard training toward the end of your deload week if you’re setting it up correctly. 

Those are the basics of periodization over the mesocycle. The training block is a sequence of mesocycles strung together for one unifying purpose. For example, a muscle gain block may be 3 mesocycles of 6 weeks each, one after another, with weight gain the goal for all 18 of those total weeks, or a fat loss block might be 2 mesocycles of 5 weeks long during which weight loss is the goal for all 10 of those weeks.

Though we can potentially alter all training variables over a training block, frequency, exercise selection, and loading are definitely noteworthy.

Frequency Periodization

When you start a training block, your MEVs are very low and so are your weekly MRVs. Thus, you can fit your total training volume relatively easily into lower frequencies, such as 2x per week per muscle group, for example. As training progresses and you start your next meso, not only do your per-session MEVs go up, but your weekly MRVs go up as well, making fitting all your training into just a few sessions more difficult. As well, you’re now quite used to the exercises, and recovery between sessions occurs much faster, allowing a higher frequency microcycle to be much more realistic. At this point, you can increase your frequency a bit, perhaps to an average of something like 3x per muscle group, for example. In the last one or two mesos, your per-session MEVs are very high and your per-week MRVs even higher. To really get the best gains, another bump in frequency is recommended, and you might go to 4x or so training per muscle group, and perhaps even higher. 

Unfortunately, super high frequencies might not be the most sustainable for a couple of reasons. First, muscles heal faster than connective tissues, and if you train with very high frequencies, sometimes your connective tissue recovery can lag behind your muscle recovery, which may set you up for injuries if unabated. Secondly, the sheer weekly volume that higher frequencies let you do productively might cause so much fatigue escalation as to not be sustainable for longer than a mesocycle or two. Thus, after training for a meso or two at your highest frequency, you might end the training block and seek to reduce the very high fatigue levels you have accumulated, in part by starting whatever phase you start next at lower frequencies.

Exercise Selection Periodization

For normal exercise selection decisions, you can just follow the 4-part exercise deletion and replacement guidelines in the variation section above. But as you add sessions from meso to meso with a climbing frequency, you’ll need to consider adding exercises. Yes, you can repeat exercises a few times in the week with different loads, but we recommend doing this sparingly, and more often adding in new exercises when you add new sessions as frequency climbs. Thus, you might start with an exercise on Monday and a different one on Thursday in a 2x meso, but when you move to 3x, you might have to add a new exercise on Friday, keeping the Monday exercise the same and moving the Thursday exercise to Wednesday. Because fatigue and wear and tear increase with each meso in a block, we recommend adding less systemically disruptive exercises more often than adding more disruptive ones. For example, you might consider adding some pulldowns on that Friday 3x session but adding barbell bent rows to an already fatiguing week of back training might be overkill. Yes, you can add very tough movements as you go, but we recommend against it in most cases. Thus, you start with pretty much only or mostly basic, high-stress moves such as barbell rows and weighted pullups earlier in the block, and later on add pulldowns, machine rows, and other such less fatiguing exercises as you add in sessions to expand frequency over the training block. 

Loading Periodization

Whatever exercises you’ve carried over from one meso to the next should be done in the same rep ranges as they were done in the last mesos. For example, if you did barbell rows in the 5-10 rep range on a first set in the last meso, in the next meso, you should continue your loading progression to stay in that same rep range, which often means just adding small increments of weight from where you last left off in the last meso, or lightening up the weight just enough to get similar reps at 3-4 RIR again in the first week. But for new exercises added in each meso as frequency goes up, we recommend adding in the moderate (10-20) and light (20-30) rep ranges instead of the heavy (5-10) range. This recommendation occurs for two reasons. First, as you take on more wear and tear and fatigue, adding more 5-10 rep movements might cause a large increase in injury risk, especially now that you’re asking your body to perform with such heavy loads with even less recovery time between sessions. Secondly, very high rep (20-30) training seems to cause robust gains over a meso or two, but in part because your body adapts to buffering metabolites so quickly, might not work nearly as well for much longer. Thus, you may want to start with heavier training in the first meso of a block, keep it for all remaining mesos, and add in lighter training with new sessions as you go, which also pairs well with the selection of less fatiguing exercises. Here’s an example of how that might look for the back:

 	Meso 1	Meso 2	Meso 3
Mon

Barbell Rows: 5-10

Barbell Rows: 5-10

Barbell Rows: 5-10

Wed

x

Weighted Pullups: 10-20

Weighted Pullups: 10-20

Thurs

Weighted Pullups: 10-20

x

x

Fri

x

Machine Rows: 10-20

Machine Rows: 10-20

Sat

x

 	
Pulldowns: 20-30


Once you’ve done a whole training block, you can do a mesocycle of low frequency (2x) training at MV with mostly 5-10 rep ranges and compound movements to resensitize your muscles to volume and growth again. This meso can take about a month and can be good to pair with maintenance eating to bring down any diet fatigue you might have from hard dieting in the last block. If you don’t have any real diet fatigue, you can instead take around 2 weeks of active rest (sometimes just one week if you count the deload after your last meso), where you train with 1x frequency for every muscle, with only about 2 working sets per muscle per session, and with weights that are around 50% of your 5-10 range, but doing them for only 5-10 reps per set. This ultra-easy training can make you ready for another whole block of training in the gym and can even be replaced with no training at all if you’re feeling really beat up or tired. Once you’ve taken this easy time, you’re probably ready to give another training block a go!

TRAINING MODALITIES
Straight Sets

Straight sets are sets performed to 0-4 RIR, with enough rest time to recover all 4 limiting factors (see the rest time section above for details).

Because most back training is composed of large amplitude, large muscle-mass, compound exercises, it’s ideal for straight set training, which will be the vast majority of back training. 

Down Sets

Down sets are straight sets, but with less weight (usually 10-20% less) than the previous straight sets. By lowering the weight, you can keep reps over 5 per set, and/or keep the mind-muscle connection high and keep technique excellent to continue to have a high stimulus to fatigue ratio in every set of that exercise.  

Down sets are excellent tools in back training, as reps on compound moves such as pullups and bent rows can fall off quickly while fatigue rises quickly. Down sets on such exercises can re-vamp the technique and mind muscle connection, while allowing more reps to be done and thus more time in each set to focus the mind-muscle connection.

Controlled Eccentrics and Pauses

Concentric, eccentric, and isometric phases of each exercise can be between half a second and 3 seconds long and still confer near-optimal effects on hypertrophy. In some cases, slowing down eccentrics and extending pauses can enhance technique, mind-muscle connection, and safety of the exercise.

Pausing can be great at the bottom of pullups and bent rows to both enhance safety and standardize the tracking of performance. Several second peak contractions can be beneficial especially on pulldowns and back machines when targeting the hard-to-reach muscles of the mid back, such as the lower traps and rhomboids. Because loaded stretch under high tension stimulates growth, not all back movements should have long peak contractions, as that will require a massive load reduction for the exercise and will reduce the effect of the stretched position. Most of your back moves should have just a split second peak contraction, while a dedicated few can be intentionally light to allow for a peak hold.

Giant Sets 

Giant sets give you a certain weight to lift, an RIR range to hit (usually 0-4 RIR), and a goal of total reps over as many sets as it takes. An example is aiming to do 100lbs for however many sets it takes to get 60 total reps, while taking normal rest between each set. Such an approach can take the focus off of having to match or exceed the per-set reps you did last week, and can thus let you super-focus on technique and the mind-muscle connection, thus potentially improving both and getting more out of the training with exercises that can demand lots of technique and mind-muscle connection to be effective. If you’d like to be super precise in counting sets for your volume landmarks, we recommend counting giant sets at 2/3 of the contribution of straight sets, such that if you did 6 total sets to get to your giant set rep target, you can count that as 4 sets of “straight set equivalency” in terms of stimulus and fatigue. This discount is because with a higher focus on technique and mind-muscle connection and a lower focus on getting as many reps per set as possible, giant sets likely don’t cause as much fatigue as straight sets.

Giant sets can be excellent tools for individuals lacking a mind-muscle connection with their backs, which is very common, especially on exercises like pulldowns and machine rows, it just doesn’t pay to “crank reps” because you might as well be doing that with more compound and heavily loaded exercises such as pullups and free weight rows. On pulldowns and machine rows, giant sets can be great for just performing each rep with maximum mind-muscle and technique focus, and letting the reps add up to a total at the end, vs. pushing each set to a certain level and forgetting about mind-muscle halfway through. This isn’t to say that such exercises always need giant sets, just that they can sometimes benefit them. 

Myoreps

Myoreps are just like straight sets in that they must check all 4 recovery boxes before doing another set. However, they are different in two ways. First, while the first set is usually between 10-20 reps (0-2 RIR), the next multiple sets only rest long enough to get between 5 and 10 reps each. This is to maximize the ratio of effective (near-failure) reps to total reps over the multiple sets. Secondly, for all of those successive sets to register the highest number of effective reps per set, the local recovery factor (the muscle itself) must be by far the most limiting, so that successive sets are not limited by the nervous system, the lungs, and other muscles, allowing the final reps of each set to recruit and tense the fastest and most growth-prone motor units. For this to be possible, only isolation exercises without limiting synergists are appropriate for myoreps. If you’d like to be super precise in counting sets for your volume landmarks, we recommend counting myorep sets each as the equivalent of a straight set. While they do have fewer reps, they are often taken closer to failure and thus turn out to be about as fatiguing. 

Myoreps have limited application to the back, because their rapid and highly fatiguing nature can interfere too much with the mind-muscle connection. In addition, most back exercises are too compound and too synergist-dependent to conform well to myoreps. You can try myoreps on straight arm pulldowns and pullovers, but be very attentive to technique and mind-muscle connection.

Drop Sets

Drop sets are exactly like myoreps, but with even shorter rest times because weight is reduced by 10-20% on average between each set. The effects are very similar. The advantage of drop sets is their time saving, and their slight disadvantage over myoreps is that dropping the weight a lot can reduce mind-muscle connection via reducing tension perception. If you’d like to be super precise in counting sets for your volume landmarks, we recommend counting drop sets each as the equivalent of a straight set. While they do have fewer reps and lighter loads, they are often taken closer to failure and in such rapid and painful succession that they turn out to be about as fatiguing.

Drop sets are not often a good fit for the back, first because they have all the limitations of myoreps and myoreps are not great for the back to begin with. Secondly, when dropping weights a lot after a few sets, the mind-muscle connection can be tough to sense with very light weights and in a high fatigue state. This is especially true for the back, which is already a mind-muscle challenge. Most people who try to do drop sets of back, on say, machine rows, end up just kind of “pulling with everything” and making their forearm flexors very tired, without a great stimulus to the back itself.

Pre-Exhaust Supersets

These supersets begin with an isolation exercise for a given muscle group, and with no rest after taking it to 0-2 RIR, end with a compound exercise to which the target muscle is a big contributor. The local pre-exhaust of the isolation exercise allows the target muscle to be by far the limiting factor for the compound exercise that follows, and lets it be exposed to a few more effective reps than it otherwise would be if that compound was done fresh. After each 2-exercise superset, 4-factor rest is again taken until the next 2-exercise superset begins. If you’d like to be super precise in counting sets for your volume landmarks, we recommend counting pre-exhaust supersets as 1.5x as the equivalent of a straight set. This is because the compound exercise done in the second part of the set is only limited (highly) by the target pre-exhausted muscle, and this isn’t nearly as fatiguing, especially systemically, as it would be if it were done fresh.

Pre-exhaust can be done for the back by doing straight-arm pulldowns or pullovers before pulldowns, for example. In the grand scheme, the back doesn’t seem to be the most fertile ground for pre-exhaust training, with most other muscles being much better suited to it.

Occlusion Sets

Occlusion training is myorep training with the limb occluded just above the muscle. This occlusion causes the local muscle and nerve to be far and away the limiting factors on recovery between sets, and thus allows you to focus in on a target muscle group that might have otherwise been difficult to reach with non-occluded movements. The big benefit is time saving, because rest between occluded sets is only long enough to get another 5 reps, and you can also use weights at the very low end of the growth range and even a bit lower (20-30% 1RM). The downside is that the local vasculature adapts very quickly to occlusion, so it might not be very effective for any more than a mesocycle or two in a row. Also, some muscles are much harder than others to occlude, or even impossible to occlude. If you’d like to be super precise in counting sets for your volume landmarks, we recommend counting occlusion sets each as the equivalent of 2/3 of a straight set, as they cause much less systemic fatigue due to the lower reps and weights used.

Because it’s pretty much impossible to occlude the back muscles, occlusion sets have no real place in a back training program.

Special Note

Deadlifts and stiff-legged deadlifts can help build a massive back.

BICEP GROWTH TRAINING TIPS

Updated: Oct 29, 2020

To be technical for a minute, the muscle group being discussed here would be more accurately termed the “elbow flexors” which include the biceps, the brachialis, and several other muscles and supporting muscles. We’re just referring to this muscle grouping as “biceps” for the sake of simplicity and easy internet searching.

MV = Maintenance Volume:
Perhaps around 4 sets per week are needed to keep bicep gains from declining. This is a very small number of sets because your back training will already be contributing to your biceps volume to a meaningful extent. We recommend 2 weekly sessions for maintenance, so that’s 2 sets per session, but you can probably get away with one weekly bicep session for 4 sets and still maintain in an isocaloric state, and can do up to 3 sessions at 1-2 sets each as well. You can even go up to 4 session of 1 set each or so, but that’s usually just not required, and you can maintain with less effort on your part.

MEV = Minimum Effective Volume:
Most intermediate-advanced lifters need at least 8 sets of direct bicep work per week to make gains, and for some, it’s even more than that. If you’re training twice a week, that’s about 4 sets per session. It’s about 2-3 sets per session for 3x training, 2 sets for 4x training, and 1-2 sets or so for 5x or 6x training.

MAV = Maximum Adaptive Volume:
The maximum adaptive volume of a single session of any trained muscle group is still speculative, but research suggests it’s probably no lower than 4 working sets per session and no higher than 12 working sets per session in most intermediates. When you design your program and progressions, having lots of sessions with much fewer than 4 working sets per muscle group per session for multiple weeks on end might not be very efficient, and you might benefit from combining a few of these lower volume sessions to get the same volume but in fewer weekly sessions. Also, not exceeding 12 sets per session per muscle group for more than a few weeks is probably a good idea.

MRV = Maximum Recoverable Volume:
The MRV depends highly on the number of sessions per week. With 2 sessions, the average intermediate MRV for biceps might be around 20 sets per week. With three sessions, it’s closer to 25 sets per week. With 4 sessions, it’s around 30 sets, and with 5 or 6 weekly sessions, it might be as high as 35 sets per week in many cases.  The less back work you do in a mesocycle, the higher your biceps MRV will be.

EXERCISES
While the biceps are involved in shoulder flexion (and can thus get pretty sore from chest flyes, for example), and can be taxed significantly through close grip pulling during back training, their direct work is based on a large variety of curls of different kinds.

Alternating Dumbbell Curl
Barbell Curl Narrow Grip
Barbell Curl Normal Grip
Cable EZ Bar Curl Wide Grip
Cable EZ Bar Curl
Dumbbell Single Arm Preacher Curl
Dumbbell Spider Curl
Dumbbell Twist Curl
EZ Bar Curl Narrow Grip
EZ Bar Curl Wide Grip
EZ Bar Preacher Curl
EZ Bar Spider Curl
Hammer Curl
Incline Dumbbell Curl
Machine Preacher Curl
Rope Twist Curl

VARIATION
When choosing your bicep exercises, the advanced approach is to potentially choose up to 5 different categories of biceps movements. 

Full ROM basics that let you lift big loads through most of the ROM of the biceps, such as barbell curls.
Exercises that allow you to load the supination function of the biceps, such as dumbbell twist curls.
Exercises that allow you to load the peak contraction, such as spider curls.
Exercises that load the stretch, such as the incline dumbbell curl.
Chest flyes (done on your chest sessions, of course) may be included at least on occasion to train your biceps in stretched shoulder abduction. Kind of like the hamstrings with an RDL.
You don’t have to do all of these exercises once a session, once a week, or even once every meso. But every few mesos, you should rotate around to most of them at least on occasion if you’d like full biceps development.

Within a training session, we recommend including between 1 and 3 different biceps exercises, but no more than that in most cases, as doing more than 3 biceps movements in one session is likely just a needless burning of potential exercise variations you can save for later mesocycles. Within a single week (microcycle) of training, we recommend between 2 and 5 different biceps exercises. For example, if you train biceps 3x a week, you can do a heavy barbell curl on one day, a lighter barbell curl on the next day, and a machine one-arm curl on the last day for 2 total exercises in the week. On the other hand, if you train biceps 6x per week, you might want to choose (though don’t have to choose) as many as 5 different exercises, with only one of them repeated in a heavier/lighter arrangement. Because you want to keep exercises variations fresh for when you need to change exercises (through injury or staleness, for example), you should use as few exercises per week (and thus, per mesocycle, as we recommend keeping the same exercises in every week of each meso) as you can to get the job done. If you can just do a few more sets of barbell curls and get a great workout, there’s no reason to switch to dumbbell curls, for example. If you’re doing an exercise, there should be a reason for it.

Lastly, how do you know when it’s time to switch out a given exercise from your rotation to another exercise in your list of effective choices? The decision is based on answering just a few questions about the exercise you’re currently using:

Are you still making gains in rep strength on the exercise?
Is the exercise causing any aches or pains that are connective tissue related? And are these getting worse with each week or accumulating over multiple weeks?
Is there a phasic need for the exercise to change? In other words, is the exercise appropriate for the rep range you’re trying to use it for?  Example: dumbbell curls for 5 seem kind of risky, but doing weighted underhand pullups on your back days can hammer the biceps at such low reps more safely. 
Are you getting a good mind-muscle connection on the exercise, or is it feeling stale and annoying to do?
If you are still hitting PRs on the exercise, it’s not causing any undue pains, you’re getting a good mind-muscle connection, and there’s no other need to change it, then don’t change it! If this means you keep an exercise around for up to a year or more, so be it! But if an exercise isn’t yielding any more PRs for a whole meso (especially on a muscle gain or maintenance phase), if it’s hurting you in the “bad” way, if it feels super stale, and/or if you have to dump it because it’s not appropriate to an upcoming rep range target, then you should replace it. Many times, the questions will fall on both sides, and then it’s up to you to make a wise choice considering all the 4 variables above.

RANGE OF MOTION
Only squats might be more commonly ROM-abused than bicep curls. If you can limit your ROM on curls, you will of course have all the boys and girls vying for your attention in the gym and you’ll be the king. Alternatively, if you actually want to grow your biggest arms with the smallest chances of injury, go all the way down and come all the way up when curling. Do you have to engage some shoulder flexion at the top of the movement? You can (biceps are also shoulder flexors), but you don’t have to. But if you’re not at least going close to all the way down and coming all the way up, you’re likely missing out on the growth-promoting effects of full ROM.

LOADING
In general, like all muscles, the biceps benefit from weights in the 30%-85% 1RM range, which in many people roughly translates to a weight that results in between 5 and 30 reps on a first set taken to failure. We can split this range into heavy (5-10,) moderate (10-20), and light (20-30) categories, as there are tradeoffs to make between all of them.

The first point on loading is that the biceps, like most muscles, seem to benefit from some training in all three of the rep ranges listed above. Because the moderate (10-20 rep) range often offers the best tradeoff between stimulus, fatigue, injury risk, and slow/fast fiber specificity, and mind-muscle connection, an argument can be made that a first-time program design could have most weekly working sets for the biceps in this range, perhaps up to about 50% of them. The other 50% can perhaps be split evenly between the heavy (5-10) and light (20-30) rep ranges, as loading range diversity has been shown to be a potential benefit in its own right. 

While the 10-20 range can support nearly all types of exercises, the other ranges have some practical delineations. For example, exercises that require a high degree of mind-muscle connection to have best effects may not be optimally effective in the 5-10 rep range, like spider curls, for example. Such exercises are perhaps also not ideal for the 20-30 rep range because the duration of the sets and the physical pain toward the end of them might cause the lifter to focus on just getting through the set or pushing as hard as possible instead of on the mind-muscle connection. For most types of biceps exercises, however, the whole 5-30 rep range is highly effective. 

When constructing a weekly training plan, it’s probably a good idea to train the heavy ranges before the lighter ranges. Because both types of training cause fatigue, they all interfere with each other to some extent. However, the muscle and connective tissue damage from heavier training is likely more substantial and presents a higher risk of injury if some damage already exists from earlier training. Thus, if you do sets of 5-10 on Monday and (nearly always) sustain some form of micro-tearing, sets of 10-20 on Wednesday are lower in absolute force magnitude and are unlikely to cause the micro-tearing to expand into a notable injury. On the other hand, if you’re pre-damaged from lots of sets of 10-20 on Monday, going even heavier in such a state on Wednesday in the 5-10 range is a bit more likely to result in injury. Thus, a potential sequencing of heavy-moderate-light during the week might be advisable, with a day or two of extra rest after the light session and before the next heavy session to make sure most damage has been healed and another productive week can begin.

A sample arrangement of exercises, sets, and loads can look something like this:



Monday	Wednesday	Friday

Barbell Curls: 3 sets, 5-10 reps

Spider Curls: 6 sets, 10-20 reps

Cable Curls: 3 sets, 20-30 reps


Based on your personal responses to each of the main rep ranges, you can adjust how much volume you perform in any of them. For example, if you notice that you get a better stimulus (pumps, soreness, mind-muscle connection, etc.) and lower fatigue (joint stress, systemic fatigue, joint soreness, etc.) in some of the ranges vs. others, you can do more sets in those ranges and a bit less in others, though you should in most cases still include at least some work in the least productive ranges. For example, you might find that neither 5-10 nor 20-30 rep ranges work very well for your biceps training, so you might only do a few sets of both in most weeks and do the vast majority of your sets in the 10-20 range.

REST TIMES
When determining how long to rest between any two sets in training, our goal is for enough rest to be taken such that the next set is at least close to maximally productive. How can we ensure this? By answering 4 basic questions about our recovery status:

Has the target muscle locally recovered enough to do at least 5 reps on the next set?
Has the nervous system recovered enough to remove it as a limiting factor to target muscle performance?
Has the cardiorespiratory system recovered enough to remove it as a limiting factor to target muscle performance?
Have synergist muscles in the exercise being performed recovered enough to remove them as a limiting factor to target muscle performance?
It might take only 1-2 minutes to recover very well (let’s say, 90%) on all of those factors, but because set to set recovery is asymptotic in nature, it might take another 3 minutes to get to 95% recovery and another 10 minutes more to get to 99% recovery. Since you only have so much time to spend in the gym, 10 “90% recovered sets” in 45 minutes of training is a much more anabolic stimulus than only 3 “99% recovered” sets in that same amount of time. Thus, our recommendation is to make sure you can clearly check all 4 boxes of recovery above, but to not wait much longer than what can be considered “very good” recovery in the incredibly inefficient quest for “near perfect recovery.” 

Here’s an example of what can be considered “very good” recovery between sets of biceps training. Before you do another set of barbell curls, ask yourself:

Are my biceps still burning from the last set, or do they feel ok again?
Do I feel like I can pull hard with my biceps again, and I am mentally ready for another hard set, or do I need more time to rest?
Is my breathing more or less back to normal, or is it still very heavy?
Are my forearms and lower back still very fatigued, or are they ready to support my biceps in the upcoming set of barbell curls?
If you can get the green light on all of these, you’re probably ready to do another set, and waiting much longer will almost certainly not be of benefit. 

You’ll notice that depending on the exercise and on the lifter, very different rest times will be generated by this questionnaire. For example, spider curls might not even have synergist muscles, so question 4 doesn’t even apply and rest times can be less than 30 seconds, whereas barbell curls might need 2 minutes between sets just to regain normal breathing. And if you’re on the larger and stronger side of things, and your cardio isn’t great, you’ll be resting much longer than someone smaller, not as strong, and in excellent cardio shape. While average rest times between sets of biceps training will be between 30 seconds and 2 minutes, the most important consideration is to take the rest time you need, and not copy someone else’s, rush the process, or sit around needlessly for minutes after all 4 factors are good to go for your next set to commence.

FREQUENCY
There are two main considerations for determining training frequency. The first is the duration of the increase in muscle growth seen after a bout of training between MEV and MRV. If such an increase in muscle growth lasts 7 days, then perhaps a once a week frequency is optimal. If such an increase lasts only a day, then perhaps 6 days a week for the same muscle group is much better. While direct research on muscle growth timecourses is very limited, it seems that typical training might cause a reliable 24-48 hour increase in muscle growth. This would mean that if muscle growth elevation was the only variable of concern with regards to frequency, we should train every muscle 3-6 times per week. 

However, the second main consideration on determining training frequency is recovery. A single bout of training between MEV and MRV causes muscle growth to occur, but it also presents some degree of fatigue. If we are to progress in training and allow adaptations to fully take hold over days and weeks, we must allow enough time to elapse between overloading sessions for at least most fatigue to dissipate. On average, the exact amount of fatigue dissipation must be at least enough to allow performance to return to baseline or higher, such than an overload can be presented. In other words, if you can normally barbell curl 65 for 15 reps, asking yourself “when should my next biceps workout be after this last one” can be answered by “when will you be recovered enough to be able to curl at least 65 for 15 reps?” The timecourse of fatigue is usually a bit longer than that of muscle growth, unfortunately, so that for most people, recovery, not muscle growth cessation, will be the limiting factor on frequency. In most per-session MEV-MRV training volumes, fatigue will take between 1-2 days to come back down enough to restore or improve on past performance, and that highly depends on the muscle in question and even the exercises used. 

How do you determine what training frequency is appropriate for you? You can start by training your biceps at per-session MEV volumes. After each session, you note when soreness has abated and when you feel recovered enough psychologically to attempt another overloading workout. When you’re ready, and no later, go back to the gym and train biceps again, with volumes just a bit higher than MEV (using the RP Set Progression Algorithm). If you’re recovering on time, keep coming back and training your biceps as often as you have been. If you notice that you need more time to recover, add a day to your next post-biceps-training window. If you’re recovering faster than you thought you could, train a bit more often. After a mesocycle of such adjustments, you will have a rough but very good guess as to what your average biceps training frequency can be for most of your programs going forward. In fact, your frequency will not only be tailored exactly to your responses, but you’ll be pretty sure it’s close to optimal because it was literally derived from how fast you can recover; which is the very primary variable that determines frequency. 

Just so that you have some expectation of where to start, most individuals can recover from biceps training at a timecourse that allows for 3-6 sessions of biceps per week at MEV-MRV volumes. However, only through direct experimentation on yourself can you tell where in this range is best for you and if maybe you’re even outside of this range. Just remember that so long as you’re recovered to train again (can perform at or above normal levels), training is a better idea than waiting to train, because higher frequency programs, at least in the short term, have shown to generate more muscle growth than needlessly lower ones. 

To improve your training frequency, you can alternate exercise selections between successive biceps workouts. For example, if you do barbell curls on one day, you might do dumbbell curls or spider curls the next day, and so on. This rotation of slightly different exercises and movement patterns can take repeated stress off of very small and specific parts of your muscles and connective tissues, which might reduce chronic injury risk exposure.

Please note that when you’re determining your biceps training frequency, you’ll have to juggle it a bit with your back training frequency, as unrecovered biceps can impede your back training, and even back training itself can tax your biceps enough to require a frequency reduction for direct biceps training.







PERIODIZATION
There are a few relevant timescales in periodization:

The repetition (1-9 seconds)
The set (5-30 repetitions)
The exercise (1-5 sets) 
The session (2-6 exercises)
The day (0-2 sessions)
The microcycle (usually 1 week of training)
The mesocycle (3-12 weeks)
The block (1-4 mesocycle)
The macrocycle (1-4 blocks)
We’ve already covered the most important details on most of these timescales, so in this section, we’ll focus on a brief understanding of how to manipulate training over a typical mesocycle and training block.

A mesocycle is composed of two phases: the accumulation phase and the deload phase. The accumulation phase lasts as long as it takes to hit systemic MRV, which, because fatigue accumulates in MEV+ training, has to happen at some point. For beginners with very high recovery abilities, it can take up to 12 weeks of increasingly more demanding training for systemic MRV to be reached and a deload to be required. For very advanced lifters that have very strong, large, and volume-resistant muscles, it can take only 3-4 weeks of accumulation training to reach systemic MRV and need to deload. The deload phase is designed to bring down the fatigue from the accumulation phase, and it usually only lasts a week or so (one microcycle).

When you begin a mesocycle of training, you should probably begin at or close to your MEV for all the muscle groups you’d like to improve during that mesocycle, for reasons described extensively in our book on the subject of training volume. Week to week, you can manipulate working sets by using the Set Progression algorithm from the Training Volume Landmarks for Muscle Growth (link) article. You should seek to keep reps stable from week to week while letting your RIR decline from a 3 or 4 RIR start until it gets down to 0 (for exercises that don’t threaten the bar falling on you) or 1 (for those that do) in the last week of training. The way you keep the reps stable as RIR falls is by adding weight to the exercises you’re using. How much weight to add is a matter of an educated guess on your part. You want to add enough weight to get your target RIR with the same reps as last week. For example, if you did 100lbs last week for 10 reps on your first set of an exercise at 2 RIR, how much should you do next week to get 10 reps again but at 1 RIR? Well, you might think that adding 2.5lbs would be too easy, and you could honestly get 11 reps with that next week at 1 RIR, but adding 10lbs might require you to push to 0 RIR to get 10 reps, so you would just add 5lbs and that will probably take you where you need to be. If you’re making very rapid gains on an exercise, you might have a few weeks here and there where even though you increased weight by a bit, your RIR didn’t decline. You might have hit 8 reps at 100lbs at 3 RIR last week, and then hit 8 reps again at 3 RIR with 105lbs this week! This is a good thing, and lots of these weeks are how beginners can sometimes crank out up to 12 weeks of accumulation. Since getting to failure too soon is MUCH WORSE than getting there a bit slower, we recommend being conservative on nearly all weekly weight additions.

If you can’t realistically add weight, you can add reps. This might happen when, for example, you are using the 25lb dumbbells one week and then having to do the 30lbers next week, wildly slashing your reps. Just remember to stay within your general rep range and not leave it in any given meso. If you start at sets of about 5 reps, don’t add any more reps than will give you sets of 10, because that will take you out of the 5-10 range and no longer fullfill the needs of your training program in the way it was intended. If you start to exit a range by adding reps, add weight to take yourself back into that range, even if the increments are big and take you all the way down to the bottom of the range. Yes, this might mean that last week you were doing 20 reps with the 20lb dumbbells on your first set, and this week you’re back to only 10 reps with the 25lbers at the same or one less RIR, but that’s proper training!

Once you cannot tie previous reps in at least two consecutive sessions for a given muscle group, you have likely hit its local MRV, and need to reduce its training volume. Our recommendation is to take the next planned session with half of the planned working sets, half of the planned reps, and half of the load for recovery. In the session after, resume your load progression from before, but start at a number of sets halfway between where you started the meso and your MRV set number, and an RIR of around 2. Thus, for example, if you hit 100lbs for 10 reps on a first set last session (6 total sets in the session for that muscle group), whereas the week before, you hit 95lbs for 12 reps, your next workout can be 50lbs for 3 sets of about 5 reps. Then, next week, you resume with 105lbs, but shoot for 2 RIR and do 4 sets total, because you started the meso at 2 sets, and 4 is halfway between 2 and 6 sets. Continue to train normally after that until and unless you hit MRV again.

Systemic MRV is when you’re training so hard that your sleep quality declines, your appetite falls, and you might get sick more often. It’s also when nearly all of your muscles start to hit local MRVs at about the same time. Once that happens (and be honest with yourself when it does), stop the accumulation phase and begin the deload phase.

The deload can be done many ways, but our recommendation is to take sets to MEV for the whole week. The load should be week 1’s load for the first half of the week and ½ of week 1’s load for the second half. The reps should be roughly half of all week 1’s reps for all sets during the deload week. This makes the deload VERY EASY, which is the whole point, since hard training doesn’t bring down fatigue! You should feel refreshed and be craving hard training toward the end of your deload week if you’re setting it up correctly. 

Those are the basics of periodization over the mesocycle. The training block is a sequence of mesocycle strung together for one unifying purpose. For example, a muscle gain block may be 3 mesocycles of 6 weeks each, one after another, with weight gain the goal for all 18 of those total weeks, or a fat loss block might be 2 mesocycles of 5 weeks long during which weight loss is the goal for all 10 of those weeks.

Though we can potentially alter all training variables over a training block, frequency, exercise selection, and loading are definitely noteworthy.

Frequency Periodization

When you start a training block, your MEVs are very low and so are your weekly MRVs. Thus, you can fit your total training volume relatively easily into lower frequencies, such as 2x per week per muscle group, for example. As training progresses and you start your next meso, not only do your per-session MEVs go up, but your weekly MRVs go up as well, making fitting all your training into just a few sessions more difficult. As well, you’re now quite used to the exercises, and recovery between sessions occurs much faster, allowing a higher frequency microcycle to be much more realistic. At this point, you can increase your frequency a bit, perhaps to an average of something like 3x per muscle group, for example. In the last one or two mesos, your per-session MEVs are very high and your per-week MRVs even higher. To really get the best gains, another bump in frequency is recommended, and you might go to 4x or so training per muscle group, and perhaps even higher. 

Unfortunately, super high frequencies might not be the most sustainable for a couple of reasons. First, muscles heal faster than connective tissues, and if you train with very high frequencies, sometimes your connective tissue recovery can lag behind your muscle recovery, which may set you up for injuries if unabated. Secondly, the sheer weekly volume that higher frequencies let you do productively might cause so much fatigue escalation as to not be sustainable for longer than a mesocycle or two. Thus, after training for a meso or two at your highest frequency, you might end the training block and seek to reduce the very high fatigue levels you have accumulated, in part by starting whatever phase you start next at lower frequencies.

Exercise Selection Periodization

For normal exercise selection decisions, you can just follow the 4-part exercise deletion and replacement guidelines in the variation section above. But as you add sessions from meso to meso with a climbing frequency, you’ll need to consider adding exercises. Yes, you can repeat exercises a few times in the week with different loads, but we recommend doing this sparingly, and more often adding in new exercises when you add new sessions as frequency climbs. Thus, you might start with an exercise on Monday and a different one on Thursday in a 2x meso, but when you move to 3x, you might have to add a new exercise on Friday, keeping the Monday exercise the same and moving the Thursday exercise to Wednesday. Because fatigue and wear and tear increase with each meso in a block, we recommend adding less systemically disruptive exercises more often than adding more disruptive ones. For example, you might consider adding some cable curls on that Friday 3x session but adding barbell curls to an already fatiguing week of back training might be overkill. Yes, you can add very tough movements as you go, but we recommend against it in most cases. Thus, you start with pretty much only or mostly basic, high-stress moves such as barbell curls and dumbbell curls earlier in the block, and later on add cable curls, spider curls, and other such less fatiguing exercises as you add in sessions to expand frequency over the training block. 

Loading Periodization

Whatever exercises you’ve carried over from one meso to the next should be done in the same rep ranges as they were done in the last mesos. For example, if you did barbell curls in the 5-10 rep range on a first set in the last meso, in the next meso, you should continue your loading progression to stay in that same rep range, which often means just adding small increments of weight from where you last left off in the last meso, or lightening up the weight just enough to get similar reps at 3-4 RIR again in the first week. But for new exercises added in each meso as frequency goes up, we recommend adding in the moderate (10-20) and light (20-30) rep ranges instead of the heavy (5-10) range. This recommendation occurs for two reasons. First, as you take on more wear and tear and fatigue, adding more 5-10 rep movements might cause a large increase in injury risk, especially now that you’re asking your body to perform with such heavy loads with even less recovery time between sessions. Secondly, very high rep (20-30) training seems to cause robust gains over a meso or two, but in part because your body adapts to buffering metabolites so quickly, might not work nearly as well for much longer. Thus, you may want to start with heavier training in the first meso of a block, keep it for all remaining mesos, and add in lighter training with new sessions as you go, which also pairs well with the selection of less fatiguing exercises. Here’s an example of how that might look for the biceps:

 

 	Meso 1	Meso 2	Meso 3
Mon

Barbell Curls (5-10)

Barbell Curls (5-10)

Barbell Curls (5-10)

Wed

x

Dumbbell Curls (10-20)

Dumbbell Curls (10-20)

Thurs

Dumbell Curls (10-20)

x

x

Fri

x

Cable Curls (10-20)

Cable Curls (10-20)

Sat

x

x

Spider Curls (20-30)

Once you’ve done a whole training block, you can do a mesocycle of low frequency (2x) training at MV with mostly 5-10 rep ranges and compound movements to resensitize your muscles to volume and growth again. This meso can take about a month and can be good to pair with maintenance eating to bring down any diet fatigue you might have from hard dieting in the last block. If you don’t have any real diet fatigue, you can instead take around 2 weeks of active rest (sometimes just one week if you count the deload after your last meso), where you train with 1x frequency for every muscle, with only about 2 working sets per muscle per session, and with weights that are around 50% of your 5-10 range, but doing them for only 5-10 reps per set. This ultra-easy training can make you ready for another whole block of training in the gym and can even be replaced with no training at all if you’re feeling really beat up or tired. Once you’ve taken this easy time, you’re probably ready to give another training block a go!


TRAINING MODALITIES
Straight Sets

Straight sets are sets performed to 0-4 RIR, with enough rest time to recover all 4 limiting factors (see the rest time section above for details).

The biceps respond well to straight sets, especially for more systemically fatiguing exercises like barbell and EZ bar curls. 

Down Sets

Down sets are straight sets, but with less weight (usually 10-20% less) than the previous straight sets. By lowering the weight, you can keep reps over 5 per set, and/or keep the mind-muscle connection high and keep technique excellent to continue to have a high stimulus to fatigue ratio in every set of that exercise.  

It’s quite easy to lose a good mind-muscle connection with the biceps when the reps drop off with heavy weight, so down sets can come in very handy after a few straight sets of curls.

Controlled Eccentrics and Pauses

Concentric, eccentric, and isometric phases of each exercise can be between half a second and 3 seconds long and still confer near-optimal effects on hypertrophy. In some cases, slowing down eccentrics and extending pauses can enhance technique, mind-muscle connection, and safety of the exercise.

While pauses at the stretch don’t seem to have much utility for biceps, holding the peak contraction can improve the mind-muscle connection, as can slowing down the eccentric. Both can improve overall technique on exercises, but please remember that they are not magical and won’t somehow triple your gains. They are just tools for a task.

Giant Sets 

Giant sets give you a certain weight to lift, an RIR range to hit (usually 0-4 RIR), and a goal of total reps over as many sets as it takes. An example is aiming to do 100lbs for however many sets it takes to get 60 total reps, while taking normal rest between each set. Such an approach can take the focus off of having to match or exceed the per-set reps you did last week, and can thus let you super-focus on technique and the mind-muscle connection, thus potentially improving both and getting more out of the training with exercises that can demand lots of technique and mind-muscle connection to be effective. If you’d like to be super precise in counting sets for your volume landmarks, we recommend counting giant sets at 2/3 of the contribution of straight sets, such that if you did 6 total sets to get to your giant set rep target, you can count that as 4 sets of “straight set equivalency” in terms of stimulus and fatigue. This discount is because with a higher focus on technique and mind-muscle connection and a lower focus on getting as many reps per set as possible, giant sets likely don’t cause as much fatigue as straight sets.

Giant sets can come in very handy for biceps when you’re really trying to work on your mind-muscle connection, which rep-chasing can impede significantly on exercises like curls, where “feeling it the most in the bicep” and “making sure to get another rep” can be quite divergent at times. This is especially true for curls because cheating just a bit is so easy on them. Giant sets (as well as just adding reps per set instead of weight) are also great for dumbbell curls, as they can be difficult to add weight to in small enough increments.

Myoreps

Myoreps are just like straight sets in that they must check all 4 recovery boxes before doing another set. However, they are different in two ways. First, while the first set is usually between 10-20 reps (0-2 RIR), the next multiple sets only rest long enough to get between 5 and 10 reps each. This is to maximize the ratio of effective (near-failure) reps to total reps over the multiple sets. Secondly, for all of those successive sets to register the highest number of effective reps per set, the local recovery factor (the muscle itself) must be by far the most limiting, so that successive sets are not limited by the nervous system, the lungs, and other muscles, allowing the final reps of each set to recruit and tense the fastest and most growth-prone motor units. For this to be possible, only isolation exercises without limiting synergists are appropriate for myoreps. If you’d like to be super precise in counting sets for your volume landmarks, we recommend counting myorep sets each as the equivalent of a straight set. While they do have fewer reps, they are often taken closer to failure and thus turn out to be about as fatiguing. 

Myoreps can be excellent for biceps, especially on cable and machine setups where re-racking weight doesn’t take a lot of energy. The one thing to watch out for is that the forearm muscles are often the curling synergists last to recover, so make sure your technique or grip attachment involves them the least and that you wait until they are recovered before going again.

Drop Sets

Drop sets are exactly like myoreps, but with even shorter rest times because weight is reduced by 10-20% on average between each set. The effects are very similar. The advantage of drop sets is their time saving, and their slight disadvantage over myoreps is that dropping the weight a lot can reduce mind-muscle connection via reducing tension perception. If you’d like to be super precise in counting sets for your volume landmarks, we recommend counting drop sets each as the equivalent of a straight set. While they do have fewer reps and lighter loads, they are often taken closer to failure and in such rapid and painful succession that they turn out to be about as fatiguing.

Drop sets are nearly ideal for cable biceps work. Just make sure you’re getting close to true failure on each set, as this gets difficult when the weight is really light. Anything below 30%1RM probably can’t reliably bring you to local muscular failure, so this load acts as an automatic cutoff to further drop setting.

Pre-Exhaust Supersets

These supersets begin with an isolation exercise for a given muscle group, and with no rest after taking it to 0-2 RIR, end with a compound exercise to which the target muscle is a big contributor. The local pre-exhaust of the isolation exercise allows the target muscle to be by far the limiting factor for the compound exercise that follows, and lets it be exposed to a few more effective reps than it otherwise would be if that compound was done fresh. After each 2-exercise superset, 4-factor rest is again taken until the next 2-exercise superset begins. If you’d like to be super precise in counting sets for your volume landmarks, we recommend counting pre-exhaust supersets as 1.5x as the equivalent of a straight set. This is because the compound exercise done in the second part of the set is only limited (highly) by the target pre-exhausted muscle, and this isn’t nearly as fatiguing, especially systemically, as it would be if it were done fresh.

Tough to do with biceps, but possible. Pre-exhausting with cable curls and then moving into underhand pulldowns or underhand machine rows might be a good idea to try.

Occlusion Sets

Occlusion training is myorep training with the limb occluded just above the muscle. This occlusion causes the local muscle and nerve to be far and away the limiting factors on recovery between sets, and thus allows you to focus in on a target muscle group that might have otherwise been difficult to reach with non-occluded movements. The big benefit is time saving, because rest between occluded sets is only long enough to get another 5 reps, and you can also use weights at the very low end of the growth range and even a bit lower (20-30% 1RM). The downside is that the local vasculature adapts very quickly to occlusion, so it might not be very effective for any more than a mesocycle or two in a row. Also, some muscles are much harder than others to occlude, or even impossible to occlude. If you’d like to be super precise in counting sets for your volume landmarks, we recommend counting occlusion sets each as the equivalent of 2/3 of a straight set, as they cause much less systemic fatigue due to the lower reps and weights used.

Occlusion training works very well for biceps, with the caveat that your forearm muscle endurance and recovery can sometimes still be a limiting factor.

CALF (CALVES) GROWTH TRAINING TIPS

Updated: Mar 04, 2020

Let's also review our key training volume landmarks and relate them to training the calves:   

MV = Maintenance Volume:
Perhaps around 6 sets per week are needed to maintain calf size for experienced trainers. We recommend 2 weekly sessions for maintenance, so that’s 3 sets per session, but you can probably get away with one weekly calf session for 6 sets and still maintain in an isocaloric state, and can do up to 3 sessions at 2 sets each as well.

MEV = Minimum Effective Volume:
Most intermediate-advanced lifters need at least 8 sets of direct calf work per week to make gains, and for some, it’s even more than that. If you’re training twice a week, that’s about 4 sets per session. It’s about 2-3 sets per session for 3x training, 2 sets for 4x training, and 1-2 sets or so for 5x or 6x training.

MAV = Maximum Adaptive Volume:
The maximum adaptive volume of a single session of any trained muscle group is still speculative, but research suggests it’s probably no lower than 4 working sets per session and no higher than 12 working sets per session in most intermediates. When you design your program and progressions, having lots of sessions with much fewer than 4 working sets per muscle group per week for multiple weeks on end might not be very efficient, and you might benefit from combining a few of these lower volume sessions to get the same volume but in fewer weekly sessions. Also, not exceeding 12 sets per session per muscle group for more than a few weeks is probably a good idea.

MRV = Maximum Recoverable Volume:
The MRV depends highly on the number of sessions per week. With 2 sessions, the average intermediate MRV for calves might be around 16 sets per week. With three sessions, it’s closer to 20 sets per week. With 4 sessions, it’s around 25 sets, and with 5 or 6 weekly sessions, it might be as high as 30-35 sets per week in many cases.  Especially when individuals are both well trained and still relatively light, they can often handle pretty high volumes. Heavier individuals might handle lower volumes, but have larger calves to begin with by just supporting their weight when walking around day to day! A note on calf MRVs is that, unlike for many other muscles, they can be heavily influenced by daily and weekly activity fluctuations. If you’re normally very sedentary but do a lot of walking in a certain week, your unadjusted calves will very likely take a large temporary hit to recovery ability and thus to MRV.

EXERCISES
Calf Machine
Stair Calves
Single-Leg Stair Calves
Deficit Smith Machine Calves
Leg Press Calves

VARIATION
Within a training session, we recommend including between 1 and 3 different calf exercises, but no more than that in most cases, as doing more than 3 calf movements in one session is likely just a needless burning of potential exercise variations you can save for later mesocycles. Within a single week (microcycle) of training, we recommend between 2 and 4 different calf exercises. For example, if you train calves 3x a week, you can do heavy machine calves on one day, lighter machine calves on the next day, and stair calves on the last day for 2 total exercises in the week. On the other hand, if you train calves 6x per week, you might want to choose (though don’t have to choose) as many as 4 different exercises, with two of them repeated in a heavier/lighter arrangement. Because you want to keep exercises variations fresh for when you need to change exercises (through injury or staleness, for example), you should use as few exercises per week (and thus, per mesocycle, as we recommend keeping the same exercises in every week of each meso) as you can to get the job done. If you can just do a few more sets of machine calves and get a great workout, there’s no reason to switch to smith machine calves, for example. If you’re doing an exercise, there should be a reason for it.

Lastly, how do you know when it’s time to switch out a given exercise from your rotation to another exercise in your list of effective choices? The decision is based on answering just a few questions about the exercise you’re currently using:

Are you still making gains in rep strength on the exercise?
Is the exercise causing any aches or pains that are connective tissue related? And are these getting worse with each week or accumulating over multiple weeks?
Is there a phasic need for the exercise to change? In other words, is the exercise appropriate for the rep range you’re trying to use it for? Example: machine calves for sets of 5-10 are just fine, but trying to hold a dumbbell big enough to hit 5-10 reps on stair calves might be more of a grip exercise than a calf exercise.
Are you getting a good mind-muscle connection on the exercise, or is it feeling stale and annoying to do?
If you are still hitting PRs on the exercise, it’s not causing any undue pains, you’re getting a good mind-muscle connection, and there’s no other need to change it, then don’t change it! If this means you keep an exercise around for up to a year or more, so be it! But if an exercise isn’t yielding any more PRs for a whole meso (especially on a muscle gain or maintenance phase), if it’s hurting you in the “bad” way, if it feels super stale, and/or if you have to dump it because it’s not appropriate to an upcoming rep range target, then you should replace it. Many times, the questions will fall on both sides, and then it’s up to you to make a wise choice considering all the 4 variables above.

RANGE OF MOTION
The PAINFUL stretch at the bottom is likely a powerful cause of muscle growth for the calves, and to a lesser but meaningful effect, so is a full contraction at the top. You can try to hold each for a split second just to make sure. This both keeps calf training safer and maximizes hypertrophy. If you’ve never trained calves like this, make sure you start at very low volumes when trying this… the DOMS can be quite insane when transitioning to this technique. 

LOADING
In general, like all muscles, the calves benefit from weights in the 30%-85% 1RM range, which in many people roughly translates to a weight that results in between 5 and 30 reps on a first set taken to failure. We can split this range into heavy (5-10,) moderate (10-20), and light (20-30) categories, as there are tradeoffs to make between all of them.

The first point on loading is that the calves, like most muscles, seem to benefit from some training in all three of the rep ranges listed above. Because the moderate (10-20 rep) range often offers the best tradeoff between stimulus, fatigue, injury risk, and slow/fast fiber specificity, and mind-muscle connection, an argument can be made that a first-time program design could have most weekly working sets for the calves in this range, perhaps up to about 50% of them. The other 50% can perhaps be split evenly between the heavy (5-10) and light (20-30) rep ranges, as loading range diversity has been shown to be a potential benefit in its own right. 

We must note that very few people seem to respond very well to calf training in the 5-10 rep range, so while such a range should be experimented with early on in calf training and if/when a plateau in gains presents itself, it’s perhaps not mandated for inclusion in most people’s training most of the time. In addition, be aware that axially loaded calf movements (like smith machine calves) may not be worth doing in the 5-10 rep range, as the heavy axial fatigue from such training might not be worth the tradeoff. Additionally, calf training in the 20-30 range seems very productive for most lifters, even perhaps as productive as calf training in the 10-20 range. 

When constructing a weekly training plan, it’s probably a good idea to train the heavy ranges before the lighter ranges. Because both types of training cause fatigue, they all interfere with each other to some extent. However, the muscle and connective tissue damage from heavier training is likely more substantial and presents a higher risk of injury if some damage already exists from earlier training. Thus, if you do sets of 5-10 on Monday and (nearly always) sustain some form of micro-tearing, sets of 10-20 on Wednesday are lower in absolute force magnitude and are unlikely to cause the micro-tearing to expand into a notable injury. On the other hand, if you’re pre-damaged from lots of sets of 10-20 on Monday, going even heavier in such a state on Wednesday in the 5-10 range is a bit more likely to result in injury. Thus, a potential sequencing of heavy-moderate-light during the week might be advisable, with a day or two of extra rest after the light session and before the next heavy session to make sure most damage has been healed and another productive week can begin. 

A sample arrangement of exercises, sets, and loads can look something like this:



Monday	Wednesday	Friday

Stair Calves: 2 sets, 5-10 reps

Calves on Calf Machine: 4 sets, 10-20 reps

Smith Machine Calves: 4 sets, 20-30 reps


Based on your personal responses to each of the main rep ranges, you can adjust how much volume you perform in any of them. For example, if you notice that you get a better stimulus (pumps, soreness, mind-muscle connection, etc.) and lower fatigue (joint stress, systemic fatigue, joint soreness, etc.) in some of the ranges vs. others, you can do more sets in those ranges and a bit less in others, though you should in most cases still include at least some work in the least productive ranges. For example, you might find that neither 5-10 nor 10-20 rep ranges work very well for your calf training, so you might only do a few sets of both in most weeks and do the vast majority of your sets in the 20-30 range. 

REST TIMES
When determining how long to rest between any two sets in training, our goal is for enough rest to be taken such that the next set is at least close to maximally productive. How can we ensure this? By answering 4 basic questions about our recovery status:

Has the target muscle locally recovered enough to do at least 5 reps on the next set?
Has the nervous system recovered enough to remove it as a limiting factor to target muscle performance?
Has the cardiorespiratory system recovered enough to remove it as a limiting factor to target muscle performance?
Have synergist muscles in the exercise being performed recovered enough to remove them as a limiting factor to target muscle performance?
It might take only 1-2 minutes to recover very well (let’s say, 90%) on all of those factors, but because set to set recovery is asymptotic in nature, it might take another 3 minutes to get to 95% recovery and another 10 minutes more to get to 99% recovery. Since you only have so much time to spend in the gym, 10 “90% recovered sets” in 45 minutes of training is a much more anabolic stimulus than only 3 “99% recovered” sets in that same amount of time. Thus, our recommendation is to make sure you can clearly check all 4 boxes of recovery above, but to not wait much longer than what can be considered “very good” recovery in the incredibly inefficient quest for “near perfect recovery.” 

Here’s an example of what can be considered “very good” recovery between sets of calf training. Before you do another set of machine calves, ask yourself:

Are my calves still burning from the last set, or do they feel ok again?
Do I feel like I can push hard with my calves again, and I am mentally ready for another hard set, or do I need more time to rest?
Is my breathing more or less back to normal, or is it still very heavy?
Are my forearms still fatigued from holding myself down in the machine, or are they ready to support my position in the upcoming set of machine calf raises?
If you can get the green light on all of these, you’re probably ready to do another set, and waiting much longer will almost certainly not be of benefit. 

Calves are distal to pretty much every major body structure, so they have very few #4 limiting synergists. Because they have few or no synergists, their training doesn’t generate a lot of central or cardiorespiratory fatigue, so that cuts #2 and #3 down considerably. The result is that much calf training only has to contend with #1’s local recovery, which is usually very rapid in the well-vascularized calves. This means that many people can perform another productive calf set when the burn in the calves from the last set goes away, which can mean rest times of as low as 10 seconds! That being said, the most important consideration is to take the rest time you need, and not copy someone else’s, rush the process, or sit around needlessly for minutes after all 4 factors are good to go for your next set to commence.   

FREQUENCY
There are two main considerations for determining training frequency. The first is the duration of the increase in muscle growth seen after a bout of training between MEV and MRV. If such an increase in muscle growth lasts 7 days, then perhaps a once a week frequency is optimal. If such an increase lasts only a day, then perhaps 6 days a week for the same muscle group is much better. While direct research on muscle growth timecourses is very limited, it seems that typical training might cause a reliable 24-48 hour increase in muscle growth. This would mean that if muscle growth elevation was the only variable of concern with regards to frequency, we should train every muscle 3-6 times per week. 

However, the second main consideration on determining training frequency is recovery. A single bout of training between MEV and MRV causes muscle growth to occur, but it also presents some degree of fatigue. If we are to progress in training and allow adaptations to fully take hold over days and weeks, we must allow enough time to elapse between overloading sessions for at least most fatigue to dissipate. On average, the exact amount of fatigue dissipation must be at least enough to allow performance to return to baseline or higher, such than an overload can be presented. In other words, if you can normally calf raise 225 for 15 reps, asking yourself “when should my next calf workout be after this last one” can be answered by “when will you be recovered enough to be able to calf raise at least 225 for 15 reps?” The timecourse of fatigue is usually a bit longer than that of muscle growth, unfortunately, so that for most people, recovery, not muscle growth cessation, will be the limiting factor on frequency. In most per-session MEV-MRV training volumes, fatigue will take between 1-2 days to come back down enough to restore or improve on past performance, and that highly depends on the muscle in question and even the exercises used. 

How do you determine what training frequency is appropriate for you? You can start by training your calves at per-session MEV volumes. After each session, you note when soreness has abated and when you feel recovered enough psychologically to attempt another overloading workout. When you’re ready, and no later, go back to the gym and train calves again, with volumes just a bit higher than MEV (using the RP Set Progression algorithm from the Training Volume Landmarks for Muscle Growth article). If you’re recovering on time, keep coming back and training your calves as often as you have been. If you notice that you need more time to recover, add a day to your next post-calves-training window. If you’re recovering faster than you thought you could, train a bit more often. After a mesocycle of such adjustments, you will have a rough but very good guess as to what your average calf training frequency can be for most of your programs going forward. In fact, your frequency will not only be tailored exactly to your responses, but you’ll be pretty sure it’s close to optimal because it was literally derived from how fast you can recover; which is the very primary variable that determines frequency. 

Just so that you have some expectation of where to start, most individuals can recover from calf training at a timecourse that allows for 3-6 sessions of calves per week at MEV-MRV volumes. However, only through direct experimentation on yourself can you tell where in this range is best for you and if maybe you’re even outside of this range. Just remember that so long as you’re recovered to train again (can perform at or above normal levels), training is a better idea than waiting to train, because higher frequency programs, at least in the short term, have shown to generate more muscle growth than needlessly lower ones. 

To improve your training frequency, you can alternate exercise selections between successive calf workouts. For example, if you do leg press calves on one day, you might do dumbbell stair calves or machine calves the next day, and so on. This rotation of slightly different exercises and movement patterns can take repeated stress off of very small and specific parts of your muscles and connective tissues, which might reduce chronic injury risk exposure. When increasing your calf training frequency, be on the lookout for interference with leg pressing and squatting, as a very high amount of calf fatigue and especially soreness can impede performance on those movements. 

PERIODIZATION
There are a few relevant timescales in periodization:

The repetition (1-9 seconds)
The set (5-30 repetitions)
The exercise (1-5 sets) 
The session (2-6 exercises)
The day (0-2 sessions)
The microcycle (usually 1 week of training)
The mesocycle (3-12 weeks)
The block (1-4 mesocycles)
The macrocycle (1-4 blocks)
We’ve already covered the most important details on most of these timescales, so in this section, we’ll focus on a brief understanding of how to manipulate training over a typical mesocycle and training block.

A mesocycle is composed of two phases: the accumulation phase and the deload phase. The accumulation phase lasts as long as it takes to hit systemic MRV, which, because fatigue accumulates in MEV+ training, has to happen at some point. For beginners with very high recovery abilities, it can take up to 12 weeks of increasingly more demanding training for systemic MRV to be reached and a deload to be required. For very advanced lifters that have very strong, large, and volume-resistant muscles, it can take only 3-4 weeks of accumulation training to reach systemic MRV and need to deload. The deload phase is designed to bring down the fatigue from the accumulation phase, and it usually only lasts a week or so (one microcycle).

When you begin a mesocycle of training, you should probably begin at or close to your MEV for all the muscle groups you’d like to improve during that mesocycle, for reasons described extensively in our book on the subject of training volume. Week to week, you can manipulate working sets by using the Set Progression algorithm from the Training Volume Landmarks for Muscle Growth (link) article. You should seek to keep reps stable from week to week while letting your RIR decline from a 3 or 4 RIR start until it gets down to 0 (for exercises that don’t threaten the bar falling on you) or 1 (for those that do) in the last week of training. The way you keep the reps stable as RIR falls is by adding weight to the exercises you’re using. How much weight to add is a matter of an educated guess on your part. You want to add enough weight to get your target RIR with the same reps as last week. For example, if you did 100lbs last week for 10 reps on your first set of an exercise at 2 RIR, how much should you do next week to get 10 reps again but at 1 RIR? Well, you might think that adding 2.5lbs would be too easy, and you could honestly get 11 reps with that next week at 1 RIR, but adding 10lbs might require you to push to 0 RIR to get 10 reps, so you would just add 5lbs and that will probably take you where you need to be. If you’re making very rapid gains on an exercise, you might have a few weeks here and there where even though you increased weight by a bit, your RIR didn’t decline. You might have hit 8 reps at 100lbs at 3 RIR last week, and then hit 8 reps again at 3 RIR with 105lbs this week! This is a good thing, and lots of these weeks are how beginners can sometimes crank out up to 12 weeks of accumulation. Since getting to failure too soon is MUCH WORSE than getting there a bit slower, we recommend being conservative on nearly all weekly weight additions.

If you can’t realistically add weight, you can add reps. This might happen when, for example, you are using the 25lb dumbbells one week and then having to do the 30lbers next week, wildly slashing your reps. Just remember to stay within your general rep range and not leave it in any given meso. If you start at sets of about 5 reps, don’t add any more reps than will give you sets of 10, because that will take you out of the 5-10 range and no longer fulfill the needs of your training program in the way it was intended. If you start to exit a range by adding reps, add weight to take yourself back into that range, even if the increments are big and take you all the way down to the bottom of the range. Yes, this might mean that last week you were doing 20 reps with the 20lb dumbbells on your first set, and this week you’re back to only 10 reps with the 25lbers at the same or one less RIR, but that’s proper training!

Once you cannot tie previous reps in at least two consecutive sessions for a given muscle group, you have likely hit its local MRV, and need to reduce its training volume. Our recommendation is to take the next planned session with half of the planned working sets, half of the planned reps, and half of the load for recovery. In the session after, resume your load progression from before, but start at a number of sets halfway between where you started the meso and your MRV set number, and an RIR of around 2. Thus, for example, if you hit 100lbs for 10 reps on a first set last session (6 total sets in the session for that muscle group), whereas the week before, you hit 95lbs for 12 reps, your next workout can be 50lbs for 3 sets of about 5 reps. Then, next week, you resume with 105lbs, but shoot for 2 RIR and do 4 sets total, because you started the meso at 2 sets, and 4 is halfway between 2 and 6 sets. Continue to train normally after that until and unless you hit MRV again.

Systemic MRV is when you’re training so hard that your sleep quality declines, your appetite falls, and you might get sick more often. It’s also when nearly all of your muscles start to hit local MRVs at about the same time. Once that happens (and be honest with yourself when it does), stop the accumulation phase and begin the deload phase.

The deload can be done many ways, but our recommendation is to take sets to MEV for the whole week. The load should be week 1’s load for the first half of the week and ½ of week 1’s load for the second half. The reps should be roughly half of all week 1’s reps for all sets during the deload week. This makes the deload VERY EASY, which is the whole point, since hard training doesn’t bring down fatigue! You should feel refreshed and be craving hard training toward the end of your deload week if you’re setting it up correctly. 

Those are the basics of periodization over the mesocycle. The training block is a sequence of mesocycles strung together for one unifying purpose. For example, a muscle gain block may be 3 mesocycles of 6 weeks each, one after another, with weight gain the goal for all 18 of those total weeks, or a fat loss block might be 2 mesocycles of 5 weeks long during which weight loss is the goal for all 10 of those weeks.

Though we can potentially alter all training variables over a training block, frequency, exercise selection, and loading are definitely noteworthy.

Frequency Periodization

When you start a training block, your MEVs are very low and so are your weekly MRVs. Thus, you can fit your total training volume relatively easily into lower frequencies, such as 2x per week per muscle group, for example. As training progresses and you start your next meso, not only do your per-session MEVs go up, but your weekly MRVs go up as well, making fitting all your training into just a few sessions more difficult. As well, you’re now quite used to the exercises, and recovery between sessions occurs much faster, allowing a higher frequency microcycle to be much more realistic. At this point, you can increase your frequency a bit, perhaps to an average of something like 3x per muscle group, for example. In the last one or two mesos, your per-session MEVs are very high and your per-week MRVs even higher. To really get the best gains, another bump in frequency is recommended, and you might go to 4x or so training per muscle group, and perhaps even higher. 

Unfortunately, super high frequencies might not be the most sustainable for a couple of reasons. First, muscles heal faster than connective tissues, and if you train with very high frequencies, sometimes your connective tissue recovery can lag behind your muscle recovery, which may set you up for injuries if unabated. Secondly, the sheer weekly volume that higher frequencies let you do productively might cause so much fatigue escalation as to not be sustainable for longer than a mesocycle or two. Thus, after training for a meso or two at your highest frequency, you might end the training block and seek to reduce the very high fatigue levels you have accumulated, in part by starting whatever phase you start next at lower frequencies.

Exercise Selection Periodization

For normal exercise selection decisions, you can just follow the 4-part exercise deletion and replacement guidelines in the variation section above. But as you add sessions from meso to meso with a climbing frequency, you’ll need to consider adding exercises. Yes, you can repeat exercises a few times in the week with different loads, but we recommend doing this sparingly, and more often adding in new exercises when you add new sessions as frequency climbs. Thus, you might start with an exercise on Monday and a different one on Thursday in a 2x meso, but when you move to 3x, you might have to add a new exercise on Friday, keeping the Monday exercise the same and moving the Thursday exercise to Wednesday. Because fatigue and wear and tear increase with each meso in a block, we recommend adding less systemically disruptive exercises more often than adding more disruptive ones. For example, you might consider adding some stair calves on that Friday 3x session but adding heavy machine calves, especially if the load is on your shoulders, to an already fatiguing week of calf training might be overkill. Yes, you can add very tough movements as you go, but we recommend against it in most cases. Thus, you start with pretty much only or mostly basic, high-stress moves such as smith machine calves and calves on the leg press earlier in the block, and later on add stair calves, machine calves that don’t load your spine, and other such less fatiguing exercises as you add in sessions to expand frequency over the training block. 

Loading Periodization

Whatever exercises you’ve carried over from one meso to the next should be done in the same rep ranges as they were done in the last mesos. For example, if you did smith machine calves in the 5-10 rep range on a first set in the last meso, in the next meso, you should continue your loading progression to stay in that same rep range, which often means just adding small increments of weight from where you last left off in the last meso, or lightening up the weight just enough to get similar reps at 3-4 RIR again in the first week. But for new exercises added in each meso as frequency goes up, we recommend adding in the moderate (10-20) and light (20-30) rep ranges instead of the heavy (5-10) range. This recommendation occurs for two reasons. First, as you take on more wear and tear and fatigue, adding more 5-10 rep movements might cause a large increase in injury risk, especially now that you’re asking your body to perform with such heavy loads with even less recovery time between sessions. Secondly, very high rep (20-30) training seems to cause robust gains over a meso or two, but in part because your body adapts to buffering metabolites so quickly, might not work nearly as well for much longer. Thus, you may want to start with heavier training in the first meso of a block, keep it for all remaining mesos, and add in lighter training with new sessions as you go, which also pairs well with the selection of less fatiguing exercises. Here’s an example of how that might look for the calves:

 

 	Meso 1	Meso 2	Meso 3
Mon

Smith Machine Calves (5-10)

Smith Machine Calves (5-10)

Smith Machine Calves (5-10)

Wed

x

Calf Machine (Shoulder Loaded) (10-20)

Calf Machine (Shoulder Loaded) (10-20)

Thurs

Calf Machine (Shoulder Loaded) (10-20)

x

x

Fri

x

Calf Machine (Hip Loaded) (10-20)

Calf Machine (Hip Loaded) (10-20)

Sat

x

x

Stair Calves (20-30)


Once you’ve done a whole training block, you can do a mesocycle of low frequency (2x) training at MV with mostly 5-10 rep ranges and compound movements to resensitize your muscles to volume and growth again. This meso can take about a month and can be good to pair with maintenance eating to bring down any diet fatigue you might have from hard dieting in the last block. If you don’t have any real diet fatigue, you can instead take around 2 weeks of active rest (sometimes just one week if you count the deload after your last meso), where you train with 1x frequency for every muscle, with only about 2 working sets per muscle per session, and with weights that are around 50% of your 5-10 range, but doing them for only 5-10 reps per set. This ultra-easy training can make you ready for another whole block of training in the gym and can even be replaced with no training at all if you’re feeling really beat up or tired. Once you’ve taken this easy time, you’re probably ready to give another training block a go!

TRAINING MODALITIES
Straight Sets

Straight sets are sets performed to 0-4 RIR, with enough rest time to recover all 4 limiting factors (see the rest time section above for details).

Calves respond well to straight sets, but as we’ll see later, they are so synergistically and systemically low in set to set recovery that nearly all straight sets end up as myoreps anyway. Also, because the calves get excellent slower and intermediate fiber stimulus just from walking and moving around, most of their growth will come from faster-twitch training, such as myoreps.

Down Sets

Down sets are straight sets, but with less weight (usually 10-20% less) than the previous straight sets. By lowering the weight, you can keep reps over 5 per set, and/or keep the mind-muscle connection high and keep technique excellent to continue to have a high stimulus to fatigue ratio in every set of that exercise.  

Very rarely needed with calf training, since the mind-muscle connection is easy, technique is simple, and fatigue between sets is so low.

Controlled Eccentrics and Pauses

Concentric, eccentric, and isometric phases of each exercise can be between half a second and 3 seconds long and still confer near-optimal effects on hypertrophy. In some cases, slowing down eccentrics and extending pauses can enhance technique, mind-muscle connection, and safety of the exercise.

Slowing down the eccentric, holding the peak contraction, and especially milking the painful stretch at the bottom are so powerful for calf growth that they are nearly mandatory for best gains, and probably should be the default training approach for calves in most cases

Giant Sets 

Giant sets give you a certain weight to lift, an RIR range to hit (usually 0-4 RIR), and a goal of total reps over as many sets as it takes. An example is aiming to do 100lbs for however many sets it takes to get 60 total reps, while taking normal rest between each set. Such an approach can take the focus off of having to match or exceed the per-set reps you did last week, and can thus let you super-focus on technique and the mind-muscle connection, thus potentially improving both and getting more out of the training with exercises that can demand lots of technique and mind-muscle connection to be effective. If you’d like to be super precise in counting sets for your volume landmarks, we recommend counting giant sets at 2/3 of the contribution of straight sets, such that if you did 6 total sets to get to your giant set rep target, you can count that as 4 sets of “straight set equivalency” in terms of stimulus and fatigue. This discount is because with a higher focus on technique and mind-muscle connection and a lower focus on getting as many reps per set as possible, giant sets likely don’t cause as much fatigue as straight sets.

Because calf training should be largely faster twitch-oriented, because technique is so simple, and mind-muscle connection pretty easy, giant sets have only very limited utility for calf training.

Myoreps

Myoreps are just like straight sets in that they must check all 4 recovery boxes before doing another set. However, they are different in two ways. First, while the first set is usually between 10-20 reps (0-2 RIR), the next multiple sets only rest long enough to get between 5 and 10 reps each. This is to maximize the ratio of effective (near-failure) reps to total reps over the multiple sets. Secondly, for all of those successive sets to register the highest number of effective reps per set, the local recovery factor (the muscle itself) must be by far the most limiting, so that successive sets are not limited by the nervous system, the lungs, and other muscles, allowing the final reps of each set to recruit and tense the fastest and most growth-prone motor units. For this to be possible, only isolation exercises without limiting synergists are appropriate for myoreps. If you’d like to be super precise in counting sets for your volume landmarks, we recommend counting myorep sets each as the equivalent of a straight set. While they do have fewer reps, they are often taken closer to failure and thus turn out to be about as fatiguing. 

Without putting too fine a point on it, myoreps are pretty much THE WAY to train calves. This happens nearly automatically, because when the calves have locally recovered to be able to do at least 5 reps on the next set, all 3 of the other recovery constraints are either long-recovered or were never even taxed in the first place. Like, if you’re running out of air training calves, you need medical attention, not bodybuilding! Because calves probably need more fast-fiber training, much over 10 rep per set after the first set might not be the best idea anyway, so myoreps are nearly perfectly suited. The side effect great news on this: calf training usually just doesn’t take that long!

Drop Sets

Drop sets are exactly like myoreps, but with even shorter rest times because weight is reduced by 10-20% on average between each set. The effects are very similar. The advantage of drop sets is their time saving, and their slight disadvantage over myoreps is that dropping the weight a lot can reduce mind-muscle connection via reducing tension perception. If you’d like to be super precise in counting sets for your volume landmarks, we recommend counting drop sets each as the equivalent of a straight set. While they do have fewer reps and lighter loads, they are often taken closer to failure and in such rapid and painful succession that they turn out to be about as fatiguing.

Because the calves recover so quickly between sets, a drop in load is often unnecessary. Especially if using a calf machine, lighter loads might actually prevent as much benefit from stretch under tension, leaving drop sets with only limited application to calf training.

Pre-Exhaust Supersets

These supersets begin with an isolation exercise for a given muscle group, and with no rest after taking it to 0-2 RIR, end with a compound exercise to which the target muscle is a big contributor. The local pre-exhaust of the isolation exercise allows the target muscle to be by far the limiting factor for the compound exercise that follows, and lets it be exposed to a few more effective reps than it otherwise would be if that compound was done fresh. After each 2-exercise superset, 4-factor rest is again taken until the next 2-exercise superset begins. If you’d like to be super precise in counting sets for your volume landmarks, we recommend counting pre-exhaust supersets as 1.5x as the equivalent of a straight set. This is because the compound exercise done in the second part of the set is only limited (highly) by the target pre-exhausted muscle, and this isn’t nearly as fatiguing, especially systemically, as it would be if it were done fresh.

Because the calves don’t have any real compound movements and are so easy to target with isolations, we have yet to actually see anyone successfully or requisitely employ pre-exhausts in calf training.

Occlusion Sets

Occlusion training is myorep training with the limb occluded just above the muscle. This occlusion causes the local muscle and nerve to be far and away the limiting factors on recovery between sets, and thus allows you to focus in on a target muscle group that might have otherwise been difficult to reach with non-occluded movements. The big benefit is time saving, because rest between occluded sets is only long enough to get another 5 reps, and you can also use weights at the very low end of the growth range and even a bit lower (20-30% 1RM). The downside is that the local vasculature adapts very quickly to occlusion, so it might not be very effective for any more than a mesocycle or two in a row. Also, some muscles are much harder than others to occlude, or even impossible to occlude. If you’d like to be super precise in counting sets for your volume landmarks, we recommend counting occlusion sets each as the equivalent of 2/3 of a straight set, as they cause much less systemic fatigue due to the lower reps and weights used.

If occlusion was perfectly designed for any muscle, it would be the calves. While there is some question about the fiber-type effect of occlusion training, it’s nearly perfectly designed to train calves and can be used as often as it’s effective. Just be ready for serious pain and push yourself very close to failure.

CHEST (PECS) GROWTH TRAINING TIPS

Updated: Oct 25, 2020

Let's also review our key training volume landmarks and relate them to training the chest:   

MV = Maintenance Volume:
Perhaps around 4 sets per week are needed to maintain chest size for experienced trainers. The chest is a large muscle and experiences a lot of damage and stimulus from heavy training, thus doesn’t require much to maintain its size in many cases. We recommend 2 weekly sessions for maintenance, so that’s 2 sets per session, but you can probably get away with one weekly chest session for 4 sets and still maintain in an isocaloric state, and can do up to 3 sessions at 1-2 sets each as well.

MEV = Minimum Effective Volume:
Most intermediate-advanced lifters need at least 6 sets of direct chest work per week to make gains, and for some, it’s even more than that. If you’re training twice a week, that’s about 3 sets per session. It’s about 2 sets per session for 3x training, 1-2 sets for 4x training, and 1 set or so for 5x or 6x training.

MAV = Maximum Adaptive Volume:
maximum adaptive volume of a single session of any trained muscle group is still speculative, but research suggests it’s probably no lower than 4 working sets per session and no higher than 12 working sets per session in most intermediates. When you design your program and progressions, having lots of sessions with much fewer than 4 working sets per muscle group per session for multiple weeks on end might not be very efficient, and you might benefit from combining a few of these lower volume sessions to get the same volume but in fewer weekly sessions. Also, not exceeding 12 sets per session per muscle group for more than a few weeks is probably a good idea.

MRV = Maximum Recoverable Volume:
The MRV depends highly on the number of sessions per week. With 2 sessions, the average intermediate MRV for chest might be around 20 sets per week. With three sessions, it’s closer to 25 sets per week. With 4 sessions, it’s around 30 sets, and with 5 or 6 weekly sessions, it might be as high as 35 sets per week in many cases.  Individuals who aren’t very strong on pressing movements, lack flexibility in their shoulders to really stretch their chests, or can’t get a great mind-muscle connection with their pecs usually have higher MRVs (and that’s not a good thing)!

EXERCISES
There are three classes of exercise that constitute direct chest training. Horizontal pressing moves that train the whole chest, incline pressing moves that train mostly the clavicular (upper chest) fibers and isolation moves that train the chest without involving the triceps:

Cable Flye
Cable Bent Flye
Cable Underhand Flye
Cambered Bar Bench Press
Deficit Pushup
Flat Dumbbell Bench Press
Flat Dumbbell Flye
Flat Dumbbell Press/Flye
Flat Hammer Machine Press
Hammer Machine Press
High Incline Dumbbell Press
Incline Dumbbell Flye
Incline Dumbbell Press
Incline Dumbbell Press/Flye
Incline Machine Chest Press
Incline Barbell Press Medium Grip
Incline Barbell Press Narrow Grip
Incline Barbell Press Wide Grip
Low Incline Dumbbell Press
Machine Chest Press
Machine Flye
Medium Grip Bench Press
Narrow Pushup
Narrow Grip Bench Press
Pec Deck Flye
Pushup
Smith Machine Bench Press
Smith Machine Incline Press
Smith Machine Narrow Grip Press
Smith Machine Narrow Grip Incline Press
Smith Machine Wide Grip Press
Smith Machine Wide Grip Incline Press
Wide Grip Bench Press
VARIATION
The chest is composed of two basic areas (clavicular head and sternal head) that demand their own special attention. In addition, isolation moves, while they don’t form the core of chest work, seem to be very helpful ingredients for maximum chest development. 

When you’re designing any week of chest training, make sure it has some horizontal, some incline and some isolation movements in it. Nearly every week of training should have at least a couple of sets of ALL of those movements. In fact, as the week progresses, it might be a good idea to rotate these movements. For example, if you train chest 6x a week, you might want to do a horizontal press on the first session, an incline press on the second, and a flye on the third, and then repeat that sequence for the second half of the week, but with different exercise choices or lighter loads for the categories.

Within a training session, we recommend including between 1 and 3 different chest exercises, but no more than that in most cases, as doing more than 3 chest movements in one session is likely just a needless burning of potential exercise variations you can save for later mesocycles. Within a single week (microcycle) of training, we recommend between 2 and 5 different chest exercises. For example, if you train chest 3x a week, you can do a heavy barbell bench on one day, a lighter barbell bench on the next day, and a flye version on the last day for 2 total exercises in the week. On the other hand, if you train chest 6x per week, you might want to choose (though don’t have to choose) as many as 5 different exercises, with only one of them repeated in a heavier/lighter arrangement. Because you want to keep exercises variations fresh for when you need to change exercises (through injury or staleness, for example), you should use as few exercises per week (and thus, per mesocycle, as we recommend keeping the same exercises in every week of each meso) as you can to get the job done. If you can just do a few more sets of barbell benches and get a great workout, there’s no reason to switch to dumbbell benches, for example. If you’re doing an exercise, there should be a reason for it.

Lastly, how do you know when it’s time to switch out a given exercise from your rotation to another exercise in your list of effective choices? The decision is based on answering just a few questions about the exercise you’re currently using:

Are you still making gains in rep strength on the exercise?
Is the exercise causing any aches or pains that are connective tissue related? And are these getting worse with each week or accumulating over multiple weeks?
Is there a phasic need for the exercise to change? In other words, is the exercise appropriate for the rep range you’re trying to use it for?  Example: barbell benches for sets of 25 just tire out your forearms, but machine presses for 25 pump up your chest as intended.
Are you getting a good mind-muscle connection on the exercise, or is it feeling stale and annoying to do?
If you are still hitting PRs on the exercise, it’s not causing any undue pains, you’re getting a good mind-muscle connection, and there’s no other need to change it, then don’t change it! If this means you keep an exercise around for up to a year or more, so be it! But if an exercise isn’t yielding any more PRs for a whole meso (especially on a muscle gain or maintenance phase), if it’s hurting you in the “bad” way, if it feels super stale, and/or if you have to dump it because it’s not appropriate to an upcoming rep range target, then you should replace it. Many times, the questions will fall on both sides, and then it’s up to you to make a wise choice considering all the 4 variables above.

RANGE OF MOTION
The chest is designed to be stretched under load, and it gets quite a bit of its growth stimulus from such motions. So if you’re training your chest and not taking presses as low as they can go (to the chest for barbells and to deeper than the chest by going outside of your shoulders for dumbbells), you’re missing out on chest growth. In fact, by lifting heavier weights than needed when avoiding full ROM, you tax the shoulder and elbow joints MORE and get hurt more often.

LOADING
In general, like all muscles, the muscles of the chest benefit from weights in the 30%-85% 1RM range, which in many people roughly translates to a weight that results in between 5 and 30 reps on a first set taken to failure. We can split this range into heavy (5-10,) moderate (10-20), and light (20-30) categories, as there are tradeoffs to make between all of them.

The first point on loading is that the chest, like most muscles, seems to benefit from some training in all three of the rep ranges listed above. Because the moderate (10-20 rep) range often offers the best tradeoff between stimulus, fatigue, injury risk, and slow/fast fiber specificity, and mind-muscle connection, an argument can be made that a first-time program design could have most weekly working sets for the chest in this range, perhaps up to about 50% of them. The other 50% can perhaps be split evenly between the heavy (5-10) and light (20-30) rep ranges, as loading range diversity has been shown to be a potential benefit in its own right. 

The 10-20 range is productive for the chest, but many individuals report that they get their best results from something between the 5-10 and 10-20 ranges, perhaps sets of 8-12 reps and even a bit lower. This is especially true for compound presses like the barbell flat bench and incline. Flyes are a bit unsafe to train in the 5-10 range in many cases, so they are preferentially trained in the 10-20 range. Dumbbell movements and dips done for the chest (leaning forward more than with triceps dips) are a bit less stable than barbell or machine movements and are best done in the 10-20 rep ranges and not the 5-10 rep ranges for both safety and the highest levels of faster-fiber recruitment. Lastly, both barbell and dumbbell movements for the chest can be limited by forearm and hand endurance and comfort in the 20-30 rep range, so chest machines and variations of pushups are likely the better choices for those ranges. 

When constructing a weekly training plan, it’s probably a good idea to train the heavy ranges before the lighter ranges. Because both types of training cause fatigue, they all interfere with each other to some extent. However, the muscle and connective tissue damage from heavier training is likely more substantial and presents a higher risk of injury if some damage already exists from earlier training. Thus, if you do sets of 5-10 on Monday and (nearly always) sustain some form of micro-tearing, sets of 10-20 on Wednesday are lower in absolute force magnitude and are unlikely to cause the micro-tearing to expand into a notable injury. On the other hand, if you’re pre-damaged from lots of sets of 10-20 on Monday, going even heavier in such a state on Wednesday in the 5-10 range is a bit more likely to result in injury. Thus, a potential sequencing of heavy-moderate-light during the week might be advisable, with a day or two of extra rest after the light session and before the next heavy session to make sure most damage has been healed and another productive week can begin.

A sample arrangement of exercises, sets, and loads can look something like this:



Monday	Wednesday	Friday

Barbell Flat Press: 3 sets, 5-10 reps

Incline Dumbbell Press: 5 sets, 10-20 reps

Cable Flyes: 2 sets, 20-30 reps

Incline Barbell Press: 3 sets, 5-10 reps 

Dumbbell Flyes: 3 sets, 10-20 reps

Weighted Pushups: 2 sets, 20-30 reps


Based on your personal responses to each of the main rep ranges, you can adjust how much volume you perform in any of them. For example, if you notice that you get a better stimulus (pumps, soreness, mind-muscle connection, etc.) and lower fatigue (joint stress, systemic fatigue, joint soreness, etc.) in some of the ranges vs. others, you can do more sets in those ranges and a bit less in others, though you should in most cases still include at least some work in the least productive ranges. For example, you might find that neither 5-10 nor 20-30 rep ranges work very well for your chest training, so you might only do a few sets of both in most weeks and do the vast majority of your sets in the 10-20 range.

REST TIMES
When determining how long to rest between any two sets in training, our goal is for enough rest to be taken such that the next set is at least close to maximally productive. How can we ensure this? By answering 4 basic questions about our recovery status:

Has the target muscle locally recovered enough to do at least 5 reps on the next set?
Has the nervous system recovered enough to remove it as a limiting factor to target muscle performance?
Has the cardiorespiratory system recovered enough to remove it as a limiting factor to target muscle performance?
Have synergist muscles in the exercise being performed recovered enough to remove them as a limiting factor to target muscle performance?
It might take only 1-2 minutes to recover very well (let’s say, 90%) on all of those factors, but because set to set recovery is asymptotic in nature, it might take another 3 minutes to get to 95% recovery and another 10 minutes more to get to 99% recovery. Since you only have so much time to spend in the gym, 10 “90% recovered sets” in 45 minutes of training is a much more anabolic stimulus than only 3 “99% recovered” sets in that same amount of time. Thus, our recommendation is to make sure you can clearly check all 4 boxes of recovery above, but to not wait much longer than what can be considered “very good” recovery in the incredibly inefficient quest for “near perfect recovery.” 

Here’s an example of what can be considered “very good” recovery between sets of chest training. Before you do another set of barbell bench presses, ask yourself:

Is my chest still burning from the last set, or does it feel ok again?
Do I feel like I can push hard with my chest again, and I am mentally ready for another hard set, or do I need more time to rest?
Is my breathing more or less back to normal, or is it still very heavy?
Are my front delts and triceps still very fatigued, or are they ready to support my chest in the upcoming set of barbell bench presses?
If you can get the green light on all of these, you’re probably ready to do another set, and waiting much longer will almost certainly not be of benefit. 

You’ll notice that depending on the exercise and on the lifter, very different rest times will be generated by this questionnaire. For example, pec deck flyes might not even have synergist muscles, so question 4 doesn’t even apply and rest times can be less than 45 seconds, whereas barbell bench presses might need 3 minutes between sets just to regain normal breathing. And if you’re on the larger and stronger side of things, and your cardio isn’t great, you’ll be resting much longer than someone smaller, not as strong, and in excellent cardio shape. While average rest times between sets of chest training will be between 1 and 3 minutes, the most important consideration is to take the rest time you need, and not copy someone else’s, rush the process, or sit around needlessly for minutes after all 4 factors are good to go for your next set to commence

FREQUENCY
There are two main considerations for determining training frequency. The first is the duration of the increase in muscle growth seen after a bout of training between MEV and MRV. If such an increase in muscle growth lasts 7 days, then perhaps a once a week frequency is optimal. If such an increase lasts only a day, then perhaps 6 days a week for the same muscle group is much better. While direct research on muscle growth timecourses is very limited, it seems that typical training might cause a reliable 24-48 hour increase in muscle growth. This would mean that if muscle growth elevation was the only variable of concern with regards to frequency, we should train every muscle 3-6 times per week. 

However, the second main consideration on determining training frequency is recovery. A single bout of training between MEV and MRV causes muscle growth to occur, but it also presents some degree of fatigue. If we are to progress in training and allow adaptations to fully take hold over days and weeks, we must allow enough time to elapse between overloading sessions for at least most fatigue to dissipate. On average, the exact amount of fatigue dissipation must be at least enough to allow performance to return to baseline or higher, such than an overload can be presented. In other words, if you can normally barbell incline press 135 for 15 reps, asking yourself “when should my next chest workout be after this last one” can be answered by “when will you be recovered enough to be able to incline press at least 135 for 15 reps?” The timecourse of fatigue is usually a bit longer than that of muscle growth, unfortunately, so that for most people, recovery, not muscle growth cessation, will be the limiting factor on frequency. In most per-session MEV-MRV training volumes, fatigue will take between 1-2 days to come back down enough to restore or improve on past performance, and that highly depends on the muscle in question and even the exercises used. 

How do you determine what training frequency is appropriate for you? You can start by training your chest at per-session MEV volumes. After each session, you note when soreness has abated and when you feel recovered enough psychologically to attempt another overloading workout. When you’re ready, and no later, go back to the gym and train chest again, with volumes just a bit higher than MEV (using the RP Set Progression Algorithm). If you’re recovering on time, keep coming back and training your chest as often as you have been. If you notice that you need more time to recover, add a day to your next post-chest-training window. If you’re recovering faster than you thought you could, train a bit more often. After a mesocycle of such adjustments, you will have a rough but very good guess as to what your average chest training frequency can be for most of your programs going forward. In fact, your frequency will not only be tailored exactly to your responses, but you’ll be pretty sure it’s close to optimal because it was literally derived from how fast you can recover; which is the very primary variable that determines frequency. 

Just so that you have some expectation of where to start, most individuals can recover from chest training at a timecourse that allows for 2-4 sessions of chest per week at MEV-MRV volumes. However, only through direct experimentation on yourself can you tell where in this range is best for you and if maybe you’re even outside of this range. Just remember that so long as you’re recovered to train again (can perform at or above normal levels), training is a better idea than waiting to train, because higher frequency programs, at least in the short term, have shown to generate more muscle growth than needlessly lower ones. 

To improve your training frequency, you can alternate exercise selections between successive chest workouts. For example, if you do barbell incline presses on one day, you might do dumbbell incline presses or flat machine presses the next day, and so on. This rotation of slightly different exercises and movement patterns can take repeated stress off of very small and specific parts of your muscles and connective tissues, which might reduce chronic injury risk exposure. In fact, an easy rotation is to switch between incline movements that target your clavicular pecs and horizontal movements that target your sternal pecs.

	
PERIODIZATION
There are a few relevant timescales in periodization:

The repetition (1-9 seconds)
The set (5-30 repetitions)
The exercise (1-5 sets) 
The session (2-6 exercises)
The day (0-2 sessions)
The microcycle (usually 1 week of training)
The mesocycle (3-12 weeks)
The block (1-4 mesocycle s)
The macrocycle (1-4 blocks)
We’ve already covered the most important details on most of these timescales, so in this section, we’ll focus on a brief understanding of how to manipulate training over a typical mesocycle and training block.

A mesocycle is composed of two phases: the accumulation phase and the deload phase. The accumulation phase lasts as long as it takes to hit systemic MRV, which, because fatigue accumulates in MEV+ training, has to happen at some point. For beginners with very high recovery abilities, it can take up to 12 weeks of increasingly more demanding training for systemic MRV to be reached and a deload to be required. For very advanced lifters that have very strong, large, and volume-resistant muscles, it can take only 3-4 weeks of accumulation training to reach systemic MRV and need to deload. The deload phase is designed to bring down the fatigue from the accumulation phase, and it usually only lasts a week or so (one microcycle).

When you begin a mesocycle of training, you should probably begin at or close to your MEV for all the muscle groups you’d like to improve during that mesocycle, for reasons described extensively in our book on the subject of training volume. Week to week, you can manipulate working sets by using the Set Progression algorithm from the Training Volume Landmarks for Muscle Growth (link) article. You should seek to keep reps stable from week to week while letting your RIR decline from a 3 or 4 RIR start until it gets down to 0 (for exercises that don’t threaten the bar falling on you) or 1 (for those that do) in the last week of training. The way you keep the reps stable as RIR falls is by adding weight to the exercises you’re using. How much weight to add is a matter of an educated guess on your part. You want to add enough weight to get your target RIR with the same reps as last week. For example, if you did 100lbs last week for 10 reps on your first set of an exercise at 2 RIR, how much should you do next week to get 10 reps again but at 1 RIR? Well, you might think that adding 2.5lbs would be too easy, and you could honestly get 11 reps with that next week at 1 RIR, but adding 10lbs might require you to push to 0 RIR to get 10 reps, so you would just add 5lbs and that will probably take you where you need to be. If you’re making very rapid gains on an exercise, you might have a few weeks here and there where even though you increased weight by a bit, your RIR didn’t decline. You might have hit 8 reps at 100lbs at 3 RIR last week, and then hit 8 reps again at 3 RIR with 105lbs this week! This is a good thing, and lots of these weeks are how beginners can sometimes crank out up to 12 weeks of accumulation. Since getting to failure too soon is MUCH WORSE than getting there a bit slower, we recommend being conservative on nearly all weekly weight additions.

If you can’t realistically add weight, you can add reps. This might happen when, for example, you are using the 25lb dumbbells one week and then having to do the 30lbers next week, wildly slashing your reps. Just remember to stay within your general rep range and not leave it in any given meso. If you start at sets of about 5 reps, don’t add any more reps than will give you sets of 10, because that will take you out of the 5-10 range and no longer fulfill the needs of your training program in the way it was intended. If you start to exit a range by adding reps, add weight to take yourself back into that range, even if the increments are big and take you all the way down to the bottom of the range. Yes, this might mean that last week you were doing 20 reps with the 20lb dumbbells on your first set, and this week you’re back to only 10 reps with the 25lbers at the same or one less RIR, but that’s proper training!

Once you cannot tie previous reps in at least two consecutive sessions for a given muscle group, you have likely hit its local MRV, and need to reduce its training volume. Our recommendation is to take the next planned session with half of the planned working sets, half of the planned reps, and half of the load for recovery. In the session after, resume your load progression from before, but start at a number of sets halfway between where you started the meso and your MRV set number, and an RIR of around 2. Thus, for example, if you hit 100lbs for 10 reps on a first set last session (6 total sets in the session for that muscle group), whereas the week before, you hit 95lbs for 12 reps, your next workout can be 50lbs for 3 sets of about 5 reps. Then, next week, you resume with 105lbs, but shoot for 2 RIR and do 4 sets total, because you started the meso at 2 sets, and 4 is halfway between 2 and 6 sets. Continue to train normally after that until and unless you hit MRV again.

Systemic MRV is when you’re training so hard that your sleep quality declines, your appetite falls, and you might get sick more often. It’s also when nearly all of your muscles start to hit local MRVs at about the same time. Once that happens (and be honest with yourself when it does), stop the accumulation phase and begin the deload phase.

The deload can be done many ways, but our recommendation is to take sets to MEV for the whole week. The load should be week 1’s load for the first half of the week and ½ of week 1’s load for the second half. The reps should be roughly half of all week 1’s reps for all sets during the deload week. This makes the deload VERY EASY, which is the whole point, since hard training doesn’t bring down fatigue! You should feel refreshed and be craving hard training toward the end of your deload week if you’re setting it up correctly. 

Those are the basics of periodization over the mesocycle . The training block is a sequence of mesocycle s strung together for one unifying purpose. For example, a muscle gain block may be 3 mesocycles of 6 weeks each, one after another, with weight gain the goal for all 18 of those total weeks, or a fat loss block might be 2 mesocycles of 5 weeks long during which weight loss is the goal for all 10 of those weeks.

Though we can potentially alter all training variables over a training block, frequency, exercise selection, and loading are definitely noteworthy.

Frequency Periodization

When you start a training block, your MEVs are very low and so are your weekly MRVs. Thus, you can fit your total training volume relatively easily into lower frequencies, such as 2x per week per muscle group, for example. As training progresses and you start your next meso, not only do your per-session MEVs go up, but your weekly MRVs go up as well, making fitting all your training into just a few sessions more difficult. As well, you’re now quite used to the exercises, and recovery between sessions occurs much faster, allowing a higher frequency microcycle to be much more realistic. At this point, you can increase your frequency a bit, perhaps to an average of something like 3x per muscle group, for example. In the last one or two mesos, your per-session MEVs are very high and your per-week MRVs even higher. To really get the best gains, another bump in frequency is recommended, and you might go to 4x or so training per muscle group, and perhaps even higher. 

Unfortunately, super high frequencies might not be the most sustainable for a couple of reasons. First, muscles heal faster than connective tissues, and if you train with very high frequencies, sometimes your connective tissue recovery can lag behind your muscle recovery, which may set you up for injuries if unabated. Secondly, the sheer weekly volume that higher frequencies let you do productively might cause so much fatigue escalation as to not be sustainable for longer than a mesocycle or two. Thus, after training for a meso or two at your highest frequency, you might end the training block and seek to reduce the very high fatigue levels you have accumulated, in part by starting whatever phase you start next at lower frequencies.

Exercise Selection Periodization

For normal exercise selection decisions, you can just follow the 4-part exercise deletion and replacement guidelines in the variation section above. But as you add sessions from meso to meso with a climbing frequency, you’ll need to consider adding exercises. Yes, you can repeat exercises a few times in the week with different loads, but we recommend doing this sparingly, and more often adding in new exercises when you add new sessions as frequency climbs. Thus, you might start with an exercise on Monday and a different one on Thursday in a 2x meso, but when you move to 3x, you might have to add a new exercise on Friday, keeping the Monday exercise the same and moving the Thursday exercise to Wednesday. Because fatigue and wear and tear increase with each meso in a block, we recommend adding less systemically disruptive exercises more often than adding more disruptive ones. For example, you might consider adding some machine presses on that Friday 3x session but adding barbell incline presses to an already fatiguing week of chest training might be overkill. Yes, you can add very tough movements as you go, but we recommend against it in most cases. Thus, you start with pretty much only or mostly basic, high-stress moves such as barbell bench presses and barbell incline presses earlier in the block, and later on add machine presses, dumbbell presses, and other such less fatiguing exercises as you add in sessions to expand frequency over the training block. 

Loading Periodization

Whatever exercises you’ve carried over from one meso to the next should be done in the same rep ranges as they were done in the last mesos. For example, if you did barbell incline presses in the 5-10 rep range on a first set in the last meso, in the next meso, you should continue your loading progression to stay in that same rep range, which often means just adding small increments of weight from where you last left off in the last meso, or lightening up the weight just enough to get similar reps at 3-4 RIR again in the first week. But for new exercises added in each meso as frequency goes up, we recommend adding in the moderate (10-20) and light (20-30) rep ranges instead of the heavy (5-10) range. This recommendation occurs for two reasons. First, as you take on more wear and tear and fatigue, adding more 5-10 rep movements might cause a large increase in injury risk, especially now that you’re asking your body to perform with such heavy loads with even less recovery time between sessions. Secondly, very high rep (20-30) training seems to cause robust gains over a meso or two, but in part because your body adapts to buffering metabolites so quickly, might not work nearly as well for much longer. Thus, you may want to start with heavier training in the first meso of a block, keep it for all remaining mesos, and add in lighter training with new sessions as you go, which also pairs well with the selection of less fatiguing exercises. Here’s an example of how that might look for the chest:

 

 	Meso 1	Meso 2	Meso 3
Mon

Barbell Incline Presses (5-10)

Barbell Incline Presses (5-10)

Barbell Incline Presses (5-10)

Wed

x

Barbell Incline Presses (10-20)

Barbell Incline Presses (10-20)

Thurs

Barbell Flat Presses (10-20)

x

x

Fri

x

Machine Flyes (10-20)

Machine Flyes (10-20)

Sat

x

x

Machine Incline Presses (20-30)

Once you’ve done a whole training block, you can do a mesocycle of low frequency (2x) training at MV with mostly 5-10 rep ranges and compound movements to resensitize your muscles to volume and growth again. This meso can take about a month and can be good to pair with maintenance eating to bring down any diet fatigue you might have from hard dieting in the last block. If you don’t have any real diet fatigue, you can instead take around 2 weeks of active rest (sometimes just one week if you count the deload after your last meso), where you train with 1x frequency for every muscle, with only about 2 working sets per muscle per session, and with weights that are around 50% of your 5-10 range, but doing them for only 5-10 reps per set. This ultra-easy training can make you ready for another whole block of training in the gym and can even be replaced with no training at all if you’re feeling really beat up or tired. Once you’ve taken this easy time, you’re probably ready to give another training block a go!


TRAINING MODALITIES
Straight Sets

Straight sets are sets performed to 0-4 RIR, with enough rest time to recover all 4 limiting factors (see the rest time section above for details).

Straight sets are excellent for the chest. The allow a ton of control and are easy for performance tracking. They should form the basis of most chest training. 

Down Sets

Down sets are straight sets, but with less weight (usually 10-20% less) than the previous straight sets. By lowering the weight, you can keep reps over 5 per set, and/or keep the mind-muscle connection high and keep technique excellent to continue to have a high stimulus to fatigue ratio in every set of that exercise.  

Down sets are definitely an option for chest, but many people report that heavier training actually lets them have a higher mind-muscle connection than lighter training for the chest. If you do have trouble with chest mind-muscle or your reps get to 5 or lower on a given exercise, by all means feel free to employ down sets.

Controlled Eccentrics and Pauses

Concentric, eccentric, and isometric phases of each exercise can be between half a second and 3 seconds long and still confer near-optimal effects on hypertrophy. In some cases, slowing down eccentrics and extending pauses can enhance technique, mind-muscle connection, and safety of the exercise.

Pausing at the bottom of presses and flyes is very likely quite preventative of major injury to the chest, as is controlling both the eccentric and the concentric. “Exploding off the chest” is a great tool for athletic performance, but its injury risks and mind-muscle downsides probably prohibit it from being a useful method of movement for the bodybuilder. You don’t have to pause each rep or squeeze at the top of all machine flyes, but as you get bigger and stronger, you might want to do especially the former, especially on your heavier sets, more of the time than not.

Giant Sets 

Giant sets give you a certain weight to lift, an RIR range to hit (usually 0-4 RIR), and a goal of total reps over as many sets as it takes. An example is aiming to do 100lbs for however many sets it takes to get 60 total reps, while taking normal rest between each set. Such an approach can take the focus off of having to match or exceed the per-set reps you did last week, and can thus let you super-focus on technique and the mind-muscle connection, thus potentially improving both and getting more out of the training with exercises that can demand lots of technique and mind-muscle connection to be effective. If you’d like to be super precise in counting sets for your volume landmarks, we recommend counting giant sets at 2/3 of the contribution of straight sets, such that if you did 6 total sets to get to your giant set rep target, you can count that as 4 sets of “straight set equivalency” in terms of stimulus and fatigue. This discount is because with a higher focus on technique and mind-muscle connection and a lower focus on getting as many reps per set as possible, giant sets likely don’t cause as much fatigue as straight sets.

The chest often gives better mind-muscle feedback the more fatigued it gets and the lower the reps are, so giant sets aren’t as useful for the chest as they are for many other muscles. That being said, sometimes flyes and dumbbell presses can be tough to do technically perfectly when you’re too focused on just getting the reps, so giant sets can come in very hand in such cases.

Myoreps

Myoreps are just like straight sets in that they must check all 4 recovery boxes before doing another set. However, they are different in two ways. First, while the first set is usually between 10-20 reps (0-2 RIR), the next multiple sets only rest long enough to get between 5 and 10 reps each. This is to maximize the ratio of effective (near-failure) reps to total reps over the multiple sets. Secondly, for all of those successive sets to register the highest number of effective reps per set, the local recovery factor (the muscle itself) must be by far the most limiting, so that successive sets are not limited by the nervous system, the lungs, and other muscles, allowing the final reps of each set to recruit and tense the fastest and most growth-prone motor units. For this to be possible, only isolation exercises without limiting synergists are appropriate for myoreps. If you’d like to be super precise in counting sets for your volume landmarks, we recommend counting myorep sets each as the equivalent of a straight set. While they do have fewer reps, they are often taken closer to failure and thus turn out to be about as fatiguing. 

Myoreps can work great for chest flyes of various sorts, as well as machine presses, especially when the chest is already pre-exhausted relative to the synergists (triceps, front delts, etc.). However, because free weight presses are usually quite systemically fatiguing, myoreps are not usually appropriate for them.

Drop Sets

Drop sets are exactly like myoreps, but with even shorter rest times because weight is reduced by 10-20% on average between each set. The effects are very similar. The advantage of drop sets is their time saving, and their slight disadvantage over myoreps is that dropping the weight a lot can reduce mind-muscle connection via reducing tension perception. If you’d like to be super precise in counting sets for your volume landmarks, we recommend counting drop sets each as the equivalent of a straight set. While they do have fewer reps and lighter loads, they are often taken closer to failure and in such rapid and painful succession that they turn out to be about as fatiguing.

Drop sets can be a nice change of pace, mostly for chest flyes. However, chests tend to respond a bit better to heavier work, and dropping too much weight can lead to a “going through the motions” effect you might not like. If you want to get away from straight sets for chest, we recommend exploring myoreps before you explore drop sets in most cases

Pre-Exhaust Supersets

These supersets begin with an isolation exercise for a given muscle group, and with no rest after taking it to 0-2 RIR, end with a compound exercise to which the target muscle is a big contributor. The local pre-exhaust of the isolation exercise allows the target muscle to be by far the limiting factor for the compound exercise that follows, and lets it be exposed to a few more effective reps than it otherwise would be if that compound was done fresh. After each 2-exercise superset, 4-factor rest is again taken until the next 2-exercise superset begins. If you’d like to be super precise in counting sets for your volume landmarks, we recommend counting pre-exhaust supersets as 1.5x as the equivalent of a straight set. This is because the compound exercise done in the second part of the set is only limited (highly) by the target pre-exhausted muscle, and this isn’t nearly as fatiguing, especially systemically, as it would be if it were done fresh.

Because there are so many brutally effective chest isolations and compounds, most people will struggle much more with chest recovery than with getting enough chest stimulus. However, some people have harder times with mind-muscle connections on their chest, and compounds see their front delts and triceps as much more limiting factors. In such cases, super setting a flye variant with a pressing variant (especially wider grip) can be an excellent approach.

Occlusion Sets

Occlusion training is myorep training with the limb occluded just above the muscle. This occlusion causes the local muscle and nerve to be far and away the limiting factors on recovery between sets, and thus allows you to focus in on a target muscle group that might have otherwise been difficult to reach with non-occluded movements. The big benefit is time saving, because rest between occluded sets is only long enough to get another 5 reps, and you can also use weights at the very low end of the growth range and even a bit lower (20-30% 1RM). The downside is that the local vasculature adapts very quickly to occlusion, so it might not be very effective for any more than a mesocycle or two in a row. Also, some muscles are much harder than others to occlude, or even impossible to occlude. If you’d like to be super precise in counting sets for your volume landmarks, we recommend counting occlusion sets each as the equivalent of 2/3 of a straight set, as they cause much less systemic fatigue due to the lower reps and weights used.

Because it’s pretty much impossible to occlude the chest (and live through it), this is not an option with chest training.

FOREARM (FOREARMS) GROWTH TRAINING TIPS

Updated: Feb 17, 2020

Let's also review our key training volume landmarks and relate them to training the forearms: 

MV = Maintenance Volume:
The forearms can actually be sustained with no direct work so long as pulling work for the back is still done. Thus, you can actually put forearms on the back burner in most cases by not training them at all, and likely risk no size, or no size you can’t easily and quickly get back when you start training them again.

MEV = Minimum Effective Volume:
Most people have never trained forearms with direct focus, so their MEV is around 2 sets per week. Individuals with significant experience will find their forearm MEVs to be around the 8 set per week mark. That being said, the forearms recover very quickly, and training them once a week is unlikely to lead to consistent gains past the beginner stage. At least 2 weekly sessions are recommended (4 sets each to hit MEV for the well-trained), and 3-5 weekly sessions are probably going to result in much better gains for this quickly recovering muscle group.

MAV = Maximum Adaptive Volume:
The maximum adaptive volume of a single session of any trained muscle group is still speculative, but research suggests it’s probably no lower than 4 working sets per session and no higher than 12 working sets per session in most intermediates. When you design your program and progressions, having lots of sessions with much fewer than 4 working sets per muscle group per week for multiple weeks on end might not be very efficient, and you might benefit from combining a few of these lower volume sessions to get the same volume but in fewer weekly sessions. Also, not exceeding 12 sets per session per muscle group for more than a few weeks is probably a good idea.

MRV = Maximum Recoverable Volume:
The MRV depends highly on the number of sessions per week. With 2 sessions, the average intermediate MRV for forearms might be around 15 sets per week. This is lower than with most muscles because the forearms take so much fatigue form pretty much every other kind of training and daily life.  With three sessions, it’s closer to 20 sets per week. With 4 sessions, it’s around 25 sets, and with 5 or 6 weekly sessions, it might not be much higher, because with that many sessions, weekly recovery may become the limiting factor. You might be the person that has an even higher MRV, but that’s only something you’ll figure out by experimenting in your own training. Forearms have the unfortunate circumstance of being rather growth-resistant due to their likely slower twitch fiber types and other factors, but they also have relatively low MRVs because, technically, their use during the day and in other muscle group training (such as back, for example) amounts to something like junk volume. It’s not quite intense enough or close enough to their failure points to cause the best growth, but it’s a lot of work, so it adds lots of fatigue. 

EXERCISES
Barbell Standing Wrist Curls
Dumbbell Standing Wrist Curls
Dumbbell Bench Wrist Curls
Cable Wrist Curls
Note: Gripper exercises (such as the Captains of Crush Grippers) can definitely be used to grow the forearms. If you use them, we recommend working in the 10-30 rep range and making sure to open the gripper as wide as you can and hold it for a second in the fully closed position. This may be humbling but will ensure the proper workloads and contraction types occur to maximize growth.

VARIATION
Within a training session, we recommend including no more than 1 forearm exercise, as doing more than 1 forearm movement in one session is likely just a needless burning of potential exercise variations you can save for later days and mesocycles. It’s also needless to do more than one exercise per session because forearms have relatively low volume needs and tolerances in the context of an otherwise voluminous upper body program. Within a single week (microcycle) of training, we recommend between 2 and 3 different forearm exercises. For example, if you train forearms 3x a week, you can do a heavy barbell wrist curl on one day, a lighter barbell wrist curl on the next day, and a dumbbell wrist curl on the last day for 2 total exercises in the week. Because you want to keep exercises variations fresh for when you need to change exercises (through injury or staleness, for example), you should use as few exercises per week (and thus, per mesocycle, as we recommend keeping the same exercises in every week of each meso) as you can to get the job done. If you can just do a few more sets of barbell wrist curls and get a great workout, there’s no reason to switch to dumbbell wrist curls, for example. If you’re doing an exercise, there should be a reason for it.

Lastly, how do you know when it’s time to switch out a given exercise from your rotation to another exercise in your list of effective choices? The decision is based on answering just a few questions about the exercise you’re currently using:

Are you still making gains in rep strength on the exercise?
Is the exercise causing any aches or pains that are connective tissue related? And are these getting worse with each week or accumulating over multiple weeks?
Is there a phasic need for the exercise to change? In other words, is the exercise appropriate for the rep range you’re trying to use it for? Single-arm dumbbell wrist curls for sets of 5-10 might bother your wrists, but standing barbell wrist curls might not.
Are you getting a good mind-muscle connection on the exercise, or is it feeling stale and annoying to do?
If you are still hitting PRs on the exercise, it’s not causing any undue pains, you’re getting a good mind-muscle connection, and there’s no other need to change it, then don’t change it! If this means you keep an exercise around for up to a year or more, so be it! But if an exercise isn’t yielding any more PRs for a whole meso (especially on a muscle gain or maintenance phase), if it’s hurting you in the “bad” way, if it feels super stale, and/or if you have to dump it because it’s not appropriate to an upcoming rep range target, then you should replace it. Many times, the questions will fall on both sides, and then it’s up to you to make a wise choice considering all the 4 variables above.

RANGE OF MOTION
The forearm muscles control not just your palms, but your fingers as well. This is why it’s probably important to let wrist curls roll all the way down to your fingertips and have your palm bend all the way back before returning up and crunching your fist while flexing at the wrist. Some people experience some pain when flexing at the wrist too extremely, so those affected should avoid such excessive flexion. It’s easy to make tiny cuts to ROM when wrist curling, and you can seem to hit lots of PRs in a row by making such cuts, since the movements get easier. But remember that you’re not simply on the quest for PRs; you’re using PRs to proxy muscle growth, and using a full ROM that stimulates all motor units and provides tension under stretch is the best way to cause such growth.  


LOADING
In general, like all muscles, the forearms benefit from weights in the 30%-85% 1RM range, which in many people roughly translates to a weight that results in between 5 and 30 reps on a first set taken to failure. We can split this range into heavy (5-10,) moderate (10-20), and light (20-30) categories, as there are tradeoffs to make between all of them.

The first point on loading is that the forearms, like most muscles, seem to benefit from some training in all three of the rep ranges listed above. Because the moderate (10-20 rep) range often offers the best tradeoff between stimulus, fatigue, injury risk, and slow/fast fiber specificity, and mind-muscle connection, an argument can be made that a first-time program design could have most weekly working sets for the forearms in this range, perhaps up to about 50% of them. The other 50% can perhaps be split evenly between the heavy (5-10) and light (20-30) rep ranges, as loading range diversity has been shown to be a potential benefit in its own right. 

We must note that very few people seem to respond very well to forearm training in the 5-10 rep range, so while such a range should be experimented with early on in forearm training and if/when a plateau in gains presents itself, it’s perhaps not mandated for inclusion in most people’s training most of the time. Additionally, forearm training in the 20-30 range seems very productive for most lifters, even perhaps as productive as forearm training in the 10-20 range. 

When constructing a weekly training plan, it’s probably a good idea to train the heavy ranges before the lighter ranges. Because both types of training cause fatigue, they all interfere with each other to some extent. However, the muscle and connective tissue damage from heavier training is likely more substantial and presents a higher risk of injury if some damage already exists from earlier training. Thus, if you do sets of 5-10 on Monday and (nearly always) sustain some form of micro-tearing, sets of 10-20 on Wednesday are lower in absolute force magnitude and are unlikely to cause the micro-tearing to expand into a notable injury. On the other hand, if you’re pre-damaged from lots of sets of 10-20 on Monday, going even heavier in such a state on Wednesday in the 5-10 range is a bit more likely to result in injury. Thus, a potential sequencing of heavy-moderate-light during the week might be advisable, with a day or two of extra rest after the light session and before the next heavy session to make sure most damage has been healed and another productive week can begin. 

A sample arrangement of exercises, sets, and loads can look something like this:



Monday	Wednesday	Friday

Dumbbell Bench Wrist Curls: 2 sets, 5-10 reps

Barbell Standing Wrist Curls: 4 sets, 10-20 reps

Cable Wrist Curls: 4 sets, 20-30 reps


Based on your personal responses to each of the main rep ranges, you can adjust how much volume you perform in any of them. For example, if you notice that you get a better stimulus (pumps, soreness, mind-muscle connection, etc.) and lower fatigue (joint stress, joint soreness, etc.) in some of the ranges vs. others, you can do more sets in those ranges and a bit less in others, though you should in most cases still include at least some work in the least productive ranges. For example, you might find that neither 5-10 nor 10-20 rep ranges work very well for your forearm training, so you might only do a few sets of both in most weeks and do the vast majority of your sets in the 20-30 range.  

REST TIMES
When determining how long to rest between any two sets in training, our goal is for enough rest to be taken such that the next set is at least close to maximally productive. How can we ensure this? By answering 4 basic questions about our recovery status:

Has the target muscle locally recovered enough to do at least 5 reps on the next set?
Has the nervous system recovered enough to remove it as a limiting factor to target muscle performance?
Has the cardiorespiratory system recovered enough to remove it as a limiting factor to target muscle performance?
Have synergist muscles in the exercise being performed recovered enough to remove them as a limiting factor to target muscle performance?
It might take only 1-2 minutes to recover very well (let’s say, 90%) on all of those factors, but because set to set recovery is asymptotic in nature, it might take another 3 minutes to get to 95% recovery and another 10 minutes more to get to 99% recovery. Since you only have so much time to spend in the gym, 10 “90% recovered sets” in 45 minutes of training is a much more anabolic stimulus than only 3 “99% recovered” sets in that same amount of time. Thus, our recommendation is to make sure you can clearly check all 4 boxes of recovery above, but to not wait much longer than what can be considered “very good” recovery in the incredibly inefficient quest for “near perfect recovery.” 

Here’s an example of what can be considered “very good” recovery between sets of forearm training. Before you do another set of cable wrist curls, ask yourself:

Are my forearms still burning from the last set, or do they feel ok again?
Do I feel like I can push hard with my forearms again, and I am mentally ready for another hard set, or do I need more time to rest?
Is my breathing more or less back to normal, or is it still very heavy?
Are my traps still fatigued from holding the wrist curl bar while standing, or are they ready to support my forearms in the upcoming set of wrist curls?
If you can get the green light on all of these, you’re probably ready to do another set, and waiting much longer will almost certainly not be of benefit. 

Forearms are distal to pretty much every major body structure, so they have very few #4 limiting synergists. Because they have few or no synergists, their training doesn’t generate a lot of central or cardiorespiratory fatigue, so that cuts #2 and #3 down considerably. The result is that much forearm training only has to contend with #1’s local recovery, which is usually very rapid in the well-vascularized forearms. This means that many people can perform another productive forearm set when the burn in the forearms from the last set goes away, which can mean rest times of as low as 10 seconds! That being said, the most important consideration is to take the rest time you need, and not copy someone else’s, rush the process, or sit around needlessly for minutes after all 4 factors are good to go for your next set to commence.   

FREQUENCY
There are two main considerations for determining training frequency. The first is the duration of the increase in muscle growth seen after a bout of training between MEV and MRV. If such an increase in muscle growth lasts 7 days, then perhaps a once a week frequency is optimal. If such an increase lasts only a day, then perhaps 6 days a week for the same muscle group is much better. While direct research on muscle growth timecourses is very limited, it seems that typical training might cause a reliable 24-48 hour increase in muscle growth. This would mean that if muscle growth elevation was the only variable of concern with regards to frequency, we should train every muscle 3-6 times per week. 

However, the second main consideration on determining training frequency is recovery. A single bout of training between MEV and MRV causes muscle growth to occur, but it also presents some degree of fatigue. If we are to progress in training and allow adaptations to fully take hold over days and weeks, we must allow enough time to elapse between overloading sessions for at least most fatigue to dissipate. On average, the exact amount of fatigue dissipation must be at least enough to allow performance to return to baseline or higher, such than an overload can be presented. In other words, if you can normally barbell wrist curl 95 for 15 reps, asking yourself “when should my next forearm workout be after this last one” can be answered by “when will you be recovered enough to be able to wrist curl at least 95 for 15 reps?” The timecourse of fatigue is usually a bit longer than that of muscle growth, unfortunately, so that for most people, recovery, not muscle growth cessation, will be the limiting factor on frequency. In most per-session MEV-MRV training volumes, fatigue will take between 1-2 days to come back down enough to restore or improve on past performance, and that highly depends on the muscle in question and even the exercises used. 

How do you determine what training frequency is appropriate for you? You can start by training your forearms at per-session MEV volumes. After each session, you note when soreness has abated and when you feel recovered enough psychologically to attempt another overloading workout. When you’re ready, and no later, go back to the gym and train forearms again, with volumes just a bit higher than MEV (using the RP Set Progression algorithm from the Training Volume Landmarks for Muscle Growth article). If you’re recovering on time, keep coming back and training your forearms as often as you have been. If you notice that you need more time to recover, add a day to your next post-forearm-training window. If you’re recovering faster than you thought you could, train a bit more often. After a mesocycle of such adjustments, you will have a rough but very good guess as to what your average forearm training frequency can be for most of your programs going forward. In fact, your frequency will not only be tailored exactly to your responses, but you’ll be pretty sure it’s close to optimal because it was literally derived from how fast you can recover; which is the very primary variable that determines frequency. 

Just so that you have some expectation of where to start, most individuals can recover from forearm training at a timecourse that allows for 3-6 sessions of forearms per week at MEV-MRV volumes. However, only through direct experimentation on yourself can you tell where in this range is best for you and if maybe you’re even outside of this range. Just remember that so long as you’re recovered to train again (can perform at or above normal levels), training is a better idea than waiting to train, because higher frequency programs, at least in the short term, have shown to generate more muscle growth than needlessly lower ones. 

To improve your training frequency, you can alternate exercise selections between successive forearm workouts. For example, if you do barbell wrist curls on one day, you might do dumbbell wrist curls or cable wrist curls the next day, and so on. This rotation of slightly different exercises and movement patterns can take repeated stress off of very small and specific parts of your muscles and connective tissues, which might reduce chronic injury risk exposure.


PERIODIZATION
There are a few relevant timescales in periodization:

The repetition (1-9 seconds)
The set (5-30 repetitions)
The exercise (1-5 sets) 
The session (2-6 exercises)
The day (0-2 sessions)
The microcycle (usually 1 week of training)
The mesocycle (3-12 weeks)
The block (1-4 mesocycles)
The macrocycle (1-4 blocks)
We’ve already covered the most important details on most of these timescales, so in this section, we’ll focus on a brief understanding of how to manipulate training over a typical mesocycle and training block.

A mesocycle is composed of two phases: the accumulation phase and the deload phase. The accumulation phase lasts as long as it takes to hit systemic MRV, which, because fatigue accumulates in MEV+ training, has to happen at some point. For beginners with very high recovery abilities, it can take up to 12 weeks of increasingly more demanding training for systemic MRV to be reached and a deload to be required. For very advanced lifters that have very strong, large, and volume-resistant muscles, it can take only 3-4 weeks of accumulation training to reach systemic MRV and need to deload. The deload phase is designed to bring down the fatigue from the accumulation phase, and it usually only lasts a week or so (one microcycle).

When you begin a mesocycle of training, you should probably begin at or close to your MEV for all the muscle groups you’d like to improve during that mesocycle, for reasons described extensively in our book on the subject of training volume. Week to week, you can manipulate working sets by using the RP Set Progression algorithm from the Training Volume Landmarks for Muscle Growth article). You should seek to keep reps stable from week to week while letting your RIR decline from a 3 or 4 RIR start until it gets down to 0 (for exercises that don’t threaten the bar falling on you) or 1 (for those that do) in the last week of training. The way you keep the reps stable as RIR falls is by adding weight to the exercises you’re using. How much weight to add is a matter of an educated guess on your part. You want to add enough weight to get your target RIR with the same reps as last week. For example, if you did 100lbs last week for 10 reps on your first set of an exercise at 2 RIR, how much should you do next week to get 10 reps again but at 1 RIR? Well, you might think that adding 2.5lbs would be too easy, and you could honestly get 11 reps with that next week at 1 RIR, but adding 10lbs might require you to push to 0 RIR to get 10 reps, so you would just add 5lbs and that will probably take you where you need to be. If you’re making very rapid gains on an exercise, you might have a few weeks here and there where even though you increased weight by a bit, your RIR didn’t decline. You might have hit 8 reps at 100lbs at 3 RIR last week, and then hit 8 reps again at 3 RIR with 105lbs this week! This is a good thing, and lots of these weeks are how beginners can sometimes crank out up to 12 weeks of accumulation. Since getting to failure too soon is MUCH WORSE than getting there a bit slower, we recommend being conservative on nearly all weekly weight additions.

If you can’t realistically add weight, you can add reps. This might happen when, for example, you are using the 25lb dumbbells one week and then having to do the 30lbers next week, wildly slashing your reps. Just remember to stay within your general rep range and not leave it in any given meso. If you start at sets of about 5 reps, don’t add any more reps than will give you sets of 10, because that will take you out of the 5-10 range and no longer fulfill the needs of your training program in the way it was intended. If you start to exit a range by adding reps, add weight to take yourself back into that range, even if the increments are big and take you all the way down to the bottom of the range. Yes, this might mean that last week you were doing 20 reps with the 20lb dumbbells on your first set, and this week you’re back to only 10 reps with the 25lbers at the same or one less RIR, but that’s proper training!

Once you cannot tie previous reps in at least two consecutive sessions for a given muscle group, you have likely hit its local MRV, and need to reduce its training volume. Our recommendation is to take the next planned session with half of the planned working sets, half of the planned reps, and half of the load for recovery. In the session after, resume your load progression from before, but start at a number of sets halfway between where you started the meso and your MRV set number, and an RIR of around 2. Thus, for example, if you hit 100lbs for 10 reps on a first set last session (6 total sets in the session for that muscle group), whereas the week before, you hit 95lbs for 12 reps, your next workout can be 50lbs for 3 sets of about 5 reps. Then, next week, you resume with 105lbs, but shoot for 2 RIR and do 4 sets total, because you started the meso at 2 sets, and 4 is halfway between 2 and 6 sets. Continue to train normally after that until and unless you hit MRV again.

Systemic MRV is when you’re training so hard that your sleep quality declines, your appetite falls, and you might get sick more often. It’s also when nearly all of your muscles start to hit local MRVs at about the same time. Once that happens (and be honest with yourself when it does), stop the accumulation phase and begin the deload phase.

The deload can be done many ways, but our recommendation is to take sets to MEV for the whole week. The load should be week 1’s load for the first half of the week and ½ of week 1’s load for the second half. The reps should be roughly half of all week 1’s reps for all sets during the deload week. This makes the deload VERY EASY, which is the whole point, since hard training doesn’t bring down fatigue! You should feel refreshed and be craving hard training toward the end of your deload week if you’re setting it up correctly. 

Those are the basics of periodization over the mesocycle. The training block is a sequence of mesocycles strung together for one unifying purpose. For example, a muscle gain block may be 3 mesocycles of 6 weeks each, one after another, with weight gain the goal for all 18 of those total weeks, or a fat loss block might be 2 mesocycles of 5 weeks long during which weight loss is the goal for all 10 of those weeks.

Though we can potentially alter all training variables over a training block, frequency, exercise selection, and loading are definitely noteworthy.

Frequency Periodization

When you start a training block, your MEVs are very low and so are your weekly MRVs. Thus, you can fit your total training volume relatively easily into lower frequencies, such as 2x per week per muscle group, for example. As training progresses and you start your next meso, not only do your per-session MEVs go up, but your weekly MRVs go up as well, making fitting all your training into just a few sessions more difficult. As well, you’re now quite used to the exercises, and recovery between sessions occurs much faster, allowing a higher frequency microcycle to be much more realistic. At this point, you can increase your frequency a bit, perhaps to an average of something like 3x per muscle group, for example. In the last one or two mesos, your per-session MEVs are very high and your per-week MRVs even higher. To really get the best gains, another bump in frequency is recommended, and you might go to 4x or so training per muscle group, and perhaps even higher. 

Unfortunately, super high frequencies might not be the most sustainable for a couple of reasons. First, muscles heal faster than connective tissues, and if you train with very high frequencies, sometimes your connective tissue recovery can lag behind your muscle recovery, which may set you up for injuries if unabated. Secondly, the sheer weekly volume that higher frequencies let you do productively might cause so much fatigue escalation as to not be sustainable for longer than a mesocycle or two. Thus, after training for a meso or two at your highest frequency, you might end the training block and seek to reduce the very high fatigue levels you have accumulated, in part by starting whatever phase you start next at lower frequencies.

Exercise Selection Periodization

For normal exercise selection decisions, you can just follow the 4-part exercise deletion and replacement guidelines in the variation section above. But as you add sessions from meso to meso with a climbing frequency, you’ll need to consider adding exercises. Yes, you can repeat exercises a few times in the week with different loads, but we recommend doing this sparingly, and more often adding in new exercises when you add new sessions as frequency climbs. Thus, you might start with an exercise on Monday and a different one on Thursday in a 2x meso, but when you move to 3x, you might have to add a new exercise on Friday, keeping the Monday exercise the same and moving the Thursday exercise to Wednesday. Because fatigue and wear and tear increase with each meso in a block, we recommend adding less systemically disruptive exercises more often than adding more disruptive ones. For example, you might consider adding some dumbbell bench wrist curls on that Friday 3x session but adding barbell standing wrist curls to an already fatiguing week of forearm training might be overkill. Yes, you can add very tough movements as you go, but we recommend against it in most cases. Thus, you start with pretty much only or mostly basic, high-stress moves such as barbell standing wrist curls and dumbbell standing wrist curls earlier in the block, and later on add dumbbell bench wrist curls, cable wrist curls, and other such less fatiguing exercises as you add in sessions to expand frequency over the training block. 

Loading Periodization

Whatever exercises you’ve carried over from one meso to the next should be done in the same rep ranges as they were done in the last mesos. For example, if you did barbell standing wrist curls in the 5-10 rep range on a first set in the last meso, in the next meso, you should continue your loading progression to stay in that same rep range, which often means just adding small increments of weight from where you last left off in the last meso, or lightening up the weight just enough to get similar reps at 3-4 RIR again in the first week. But for new exercises added in each meso as frequency goes up, we recommend adding in the moderate (10-20) and light (20-30) rep ranges instead of the heavy (5-10) range. This recommendation occurs for two reasons. First, as you take on more wear and tear and fatigue, adding more 5-10 rep movements might cause a large increase in injury risk, especially now that you’re asking your body to perform with such heavy loads with even less recovery time between sessions. Secondly, very high rep (20-30) training seems to cause robust gains over a meso or two, but in part because your body adapts to buffering metabolites so quickly, might not work nearly as well for much longer. Thus, you may want to start with heavier training in the first meso of a block, keep it for all remaining mesos, and add in lighter training with new sessions as you go, which also pairs well with the selection of less fatiguing exercises. Here’s an example of how that might look for the forearms:

 

 	Meso 1	Meso 2	Meso 3
Mon

Barbell Standing Wrist Curls (5-10)

Barbell Standing Wrist Curls (5-10)

Barbell Standing Wrist Curls (5-10)

Wed

x

Dumbbell Standing Wrist Curls (10-20)

Dumbbell Standing Wrist Curls (10-20)

Thurs

Dumbbell Standing Wrist Curls (10-20)

x

x

Fri

x

Dumbbell Bench Wrist Curls (10-20)

Dumbbell Bench Wrist Curls (10-20)

Sat

x

x

Cable Wrist Curls (20-30)


Once you’ve done a whole training block, you can do a mesocycle of low frequency (2x) training at MV with mostly 5-10 rep ranges and compound movements to resensitize your muscles to volume and growth again. This meso can take about a month and can be good to pair with maintenance eating to bring down any diet fatigue you might have from hard dieting in the last block. If you don’t have any real diet fatigue, you can instead take around 2 weeks of active rest (sometimes just one week if you count the deload after your last meso), where you train with 1x frequency for every muscle, with only about 2 working sets per muscle per session, and with weights that are around 50% of your 5-10 range, but doing them for only 5-10 reps per set. This ultra-easy training can make you ready for another whole block of training in the gym and can even be replaced with no training at all if you’re feeling really beat up or tired. Once you’ve taken this easy time, you’re probably ready to give another training block a go!

TRAINING MODALITIES
Straight Sets

Straight sets are sets performed to 0-4 RIR, with enough rest time to recover all 4 limiting factors (see the rest time section above for details).

Forearms respond well to straight sets, but as we’ll see later, they are so synergistically and systemically low in set to set recovery that nearly all straight sets end up as myoreps anyway. 

Down Sets

Down sets are straight sets, but with less weight (usually 10-20% less) than the previous straight sets. By lowering the weight, you can keep reps over 5 per set, and/or keep the mind-muscle connection high and keep technique excellent to continue to have a high stimulus to fatigue ratio in every set of that exercise.  

Very rarely needed with forearm training, since the mind-muscle connection is easy, technique is simple, and fatigue between sets is so low.

Controlled Eccentrics and Pauses

Concentric, eccentric, and isometric phases of each exercise can be between half a second and 3 seconds long and still confer near-optimal effects on hypertrophy. In some cases, slowing down eccentrics and extending pauses can enhance technique, mind-muscle connection, and safety of the exercise.

Slowing down the eccentric, holding the peak contraction, and especially milking the painful stretch at the bottom are very powerful for forearm growth and probably should be the default training approach for forearms in many cases. It’s very easy to just jostle the wrists around and claim it as forearm training. In order to keep technique stable and track performance, forearm reps should usually be very well standardized and controlled.

Giant Sets 

Giant sets give you a certain weight to lift, an RIR range to hit (usually 0-4 RIR), and a goal of total reps over as many sets as it takes. An example is aiming to do 100lbs for however many sets it takes to get 60 total reps, while taking normal rest between each set. Such an approach can take the focus off of having to match or exceed the per-set reps you did last week, and can thus let you super-focus on technique and the mind-muscle connection, thus potentially improving both and getting more out of the training with exercises that can demand lots of technique and mind-muscle connection to be effective. If you’d like to be super precise in counting sets for your volume landmarks, we recommend counting giant sets at 2/3 of the contribution of straight sets, such that if you did 6 total sets to get to your giant set rep target, you can count that as 4 sets of “straight set equivalency” in terms of stimulus and fatigue. This discount is because with a higher focus on technique and mind-muscle connection and a lower focus on getting as many reps per set as possible, giant sets likely don’t cause as much fatigue as straight sets.

Forearm training technique is simple, but so many people are unused to it, and can thus greatly benefit from giant set use, especially in their first several months of forearm training.

Myoreps

Myoreps are just like straight sets in that they must check all 4 recovery boxes before doing another set. However, they are different in two ways. First, while the first set is usually between 10-20 reps (0-2 RIR), the next multiple sets only rest long enough to get between 5 and 10 reps each. This is to maximize the ratio of effective (near-failure) reps to total reps over the multiple sets. Secondly, for all of those successive sets to register the highest number of effective reps per set, the local recovery factor (the muscle itself) must be by far the most limiting, so that successive sets are not limited by the nervous system, the lungs, and other muscles, allowing the final reps of each set to recruit and tense the fastest and most growth-prone motor units. For this to be possible, only isolation exercises without limiting synergists are appropriate for myoreps. If you’d like to be super precise in counting sets for your volume landmarks, we recommend counting myorep sets each as the equivalent of a straight set. While they do have fewer reps, they are often taken closer to failure and thus turn out to be about as fatiguing. 

Without putting too fine a point on it, myoreps are pretty much THE WAY to train forearms. This happens nearly automatically, because when the forearms have locally recovered to be able to do at least 5 reps on the next set, all 3 of the other recovery constraints are either long-recovered or were never even taxed in the first place. Forearms seem to be composed of slightly more slower and intermediate-twitch fibers on average than most muscles, but, they get so much training for those by simply gripping for the other muscle groups, especially rear and side delts and the back. Thus, forearms probably need more fast-fiber direct training, much over 10 rep per set after the first set might not be the best idea anyway, so myoreps are nearly perfectly suited. The side effect great news on this: forearm training usually just doesn’t take that long! It does bear mention that the forearms don’t get as good of a pump from very low reps, so keeping myorep sets closer to 10 reps per set might work best for many.

Drop Sets

Drop sets are exactly like myoreps, but with even shorter rest times because weight is reduced by 10-20% on average between each set. The effects are very similar. The advantage of drop sets is their time saving, and their slight disadvantage over myoreps is that dropping the weight a lot can reduce mind-muscle connection via reducing tension perception. If you’d like to be super precise in counting sets for your volume landmarks, we recommend counting drop sets each as the equivalent of a straight set. While they do have fewer reps and lighter loads, they are often taken closer to failure and in such rapid and painful succession that they turn out to be about as fatiguing.

Because the forearms recover so quickly between sets anyway, a drop in load is often unnecessary. Also, it’s very hard to practically reduce the load on forearm training rapidly enough to pull off drop sets, unless you want to cannibalize all of your gym’s dumbbells!

Pre-Exhaust Supersets

These supersets begin with an isolation exercise for a given muscle group, and with no rest after taking it to 0-2 RIR, end with a compound exercise to which the target muscle is a big contributor. The local pre-exhaust of the isolation exercise allows the target muscle to be by far the limiting factor for the compound exercise that follows, and lets it be exposed to a few more effective reps than it otherwise would be if that compound was done fresh. After each 2-exercise superset, 4-factor rest is again taken until the next 2-exercise superset begins. If you’d like to be super precise in counting sets for your volume landmarks, we recommend counting pre-exhaust supersets as 1.5x as the equivalent of a straight set. This is because the compound exercise done in the second part of the set is only limited (highly) by the target pre-exhausted muscle, and this isn’t nearly as fatiguing, especially systemically, as it would be if it were done fresh.

Because the forearms don’t have any real compound movements and are so easy to target with isolations anyway, there isn’t much of a need for pre-exhaust in forearm training. However, it can be done, especially by doing forearm curls before transitioning into a static barbell or dumbbell hold. It HURTS, but it probably works!

Occlusion Sets

Occlusion training is myorep training with the limb occluded just above the muscle. This occlusion causes the local muscle and nerve to be far and away the limiting factors on recovery between sets, and thus allows you to focus in on a target muscle group that might have otherwise been difficult to reach with non-occluded movements. The big benefit is time saving, because rest between occluded sets is only long enough to get another 5 reps, and you can also use weights at the very low end of the growth range and even a bit lower (20-30% 1RM). The downside is that the local vasculature adapts very quickly to occlusion, so it might not be very effective for any more than a mesocycle or two in a row. Also, some muscles are much harder than others to occlude, or even impossible to occlude. If you’d like to be super precise in counting sets for your volume landmarks, we recommend counting occlusion sets each as the equivalent of 2/3 of a straight set, as they cause much less systemic fatigue due to the lower reps and weights used.

If occlusion was perfectly designed for any muscle, it would be the calves, and next up, the forearms. Just be ready for serious pain and push yourself very close to failure. Also, be ready to safely drop the dumbbells or barbell you’re using, because occlusion training can sneak failure up on you!


FRONT DELT (FRONT DELTS) GROWTH TRAINING TIPS

Updated: Apr 05, 2020

Let's also review our key training volume landmarks and relate them to training the front delts:   

MV = Maintenance Volume:
The maintenance volume for front delt work is legitimately no direct work in almost all cases where compound pressing is still done for the chest. If you need to get to the gym in a rush and only have time for a maintenance session, compound pushing is MUCH more worth your time than direct front delt work.

MEV = Minimum Effective Volume:
Most intermediates can make great front delt gains with NO direct front delt work, as both horizontal and incline pushing, as well as overhead pressing and triceps work is going to be very simulative of the front delts. Even most advanced lifters shouldn’t see any losses in front delt size if they are completely eliminating direct front delt work or even all overhead work, so long as they keep hammering their other compound pushing work.

MAV = Maximum Adaptive Volume:
The maximum adaptive volume of a single session of any trained muscle group is still speculative, but research suggests it’s probably no lower than 4 working sets per session and no higher than 12 working sets per session in most intermediates. When you design your program and progressions, having lots of sessions with much fewer than 4 working sets per muscle group per week for multiple weeks on end might not be very efficient, and you might benefit from combining a few of these lower volume sessions to get the same volume but in fewer weekly sessions. Also, not exceeding 12 sets per session per muscle group for more than a few weeks is probably a good idea. However, because the front delts take so much damage from chest training, anything much higher than 5 sets in a front delt session might negatively affect pec training and/or recovery and should be approached cautiously or reconsidered.

MRV = Maximum Recoverable Volume:
The front delts actually take quite a bit of damage from push training and have a very limited fatigue threshold when isolated in conjunction with chest training. They also seem to recover quite slowly in most individuals, so if you really want to make them a priority, training them directly 2x a week for a total of around 12 weekly sets is going to be about as much as you can likely handle in the context of normal chest training. Going up to 3-4x a week can expand the MRV to up to 16 sets a week, but much more than this will likely begin to compromise chest training, even if you up your frequency even more.

EXERCISES
Barbell Front Raise
Cable Underhand Front Raise
Dumbbell Front Raise
EZ Bar Underhand Front Raise
Machine Shoulder Press
Seated Barbell Shoulder Press
Seated Dumbbell Shoulder Press
Smith Machine Seated Shoulder Press
Standing Barbell Shoulder Press
Standing Dumbbell Shoulder Press

VARIATION
Within a training session, we recommend including no more than one exercise for front delts because they have such a low volume requirement and tolerance within the context of normal chest training. Because you want to keep exercise variations fresh for when you need to change exercises (through injury or staleness, for example), you should use as few exercises per week (and thus, per mesocycle, as we recommend keeping the same exercises in every week of each meso) as you can to get the job done. If you can just do a few more sets of barbell overhead presses and get a great workout, there’s no reason to switch to dumbbell overhead presses, for example. If you’re doing an exercise, there should be a reason for it.

Lastly, how do you know when it’s time to switch out a given exercise from your rotation to another exercise in your list of effective choices? The decision is based on answering just a few questions about the exercise you’re currently using:

Are you still making gains in rep strength on the exercise?
Is the exercise causing any aches or pains that are connective tissue related? And are these getting worse with each week or accumulating over multiple weeks?
Is there a phasic need for the exercise to change? In other words, is the exercise appropriate for the rep range you’re trying to use it for? Example: machine calves for sets of 5-10 are just fine, but trying to hold a dumbbell big enough to hit 5-10 reps on stair calves might be more of a grip exercise than a calf exercise.
Are you getting a good mind-muscle connection on the exercise, or is it feeling stale and annoying to do?
If you are still hitting PRs on the exercise, it’s not causing any undue pains, you’re getting a good mind-muscle connection, and there’s no other need to change it, then don’t change it! If this means you keep an exercise around for up to a year or more, so be it! But if an exercise isn’t yielding any more PRs for a whole meso (especially on a muscle gain or maintenance phase), if it’s hurting you in the “bad” way, if it feels super stale, and/or if you have to dump it because it’s not appropriate to an upcoming rep range target, then you should replace it. Many times, the questions will fall on both sides, and then it’s up to you to make a wise choice considering all the 4 variables above.

RANGE OF MOTION
Getting a DEEP stretch at the bottom of presses (especially with dumbbells) is a great way to really tax the front delts. If you press a barbell or dumbbell, at least go all the way down to touch your shoulders/clavicles in most cases. Yes, you can do more weight if you don’t, but then you’re working harder and risking more injury for less benefit. 

LOADING
In general, like all muscles, the front delts benefit from weights in the 30%-85% 1RM range, which in many people roughly translates to a weight that results in between 5 and 30 reps on a first set taken to failure. We can split this range into heavy (5-10,) moderate (10-20), and light (20-30) categories, as there are tradeoffs to make between all of them.

The first point on loading is that the front delts, like most muscles, seem to benefit from some training in all three of the rep ranges listed above. Because the moderate (10-20 rep) range often offers the best tradeoff between stimulus, fatigue, injury risk, and slow/fast fiber specificity, and mind-muscle connection, an argument can be made that a first-time program design could have most weekly working sets for the front delts in this range, perhaps up to about 50% of them. The other 50% can perhaps be split evenly between the heavy (5-10) and light (20-30) rep ranges, as loading range diversity has been shown to be a potential benefit in its own right. That being said, the front delts already get a wide spectrum of work in all of these ranges for chest training, and since failure proximity is not likely a requirement for slower fiber hypertrophy, there is unlikely to be a pressing need to do much front delt training in the 20-30 rep range in most cases. 

Most people seem to respond well to front delt training in the 5-10 and 10-20 rep ranges, though the 20-30 rep range just seems to tire out both the front delts and supporting muscles like the triceps without much growth stimulus. Because the front delts already do so much work in chest pressing, it makes some sense that just a limited amount of training in the 5-20 range is sufficient for them. 

When constructing a weekly training plan, it’s probably a good idea to train the heavy ranges before the lighter ranges. Because both types of training cause fatigue, they all interfere with each other to some extent. However, the muscle and connective tissue damage from heavier training is likely more substantial and presents a higher risk of injury if some damage already exists from earlier training. Thus, if you do sets of 5-10 on Monday and (nearly always) sustain some form of micro-tearing, sets of 10-20 on Wednesday are lower in absolute force magnitude and are unlikely to cause the micro-tearing to expand into a notable injury. On the other hand, if you’re pre-damaged from lots of sets of 10-20 on Monday, going even heavier in such a state on Wednesday in the 5-10 range is a bit more likely to result in injury. Thus, a potential sequencing of heavy-moderate-light during the week might be advisable, with a day or two of extra rest after the light session and before the next heavy session to make sure most damage has been healed and another productive week can begin. 

This is further complicated in front delt training because such training is interfered by and interferes with chest training, so our sample arrangement of exercises will include the chest program sampled earlier and front delt training woven into its context:



Monday	Wednesday	Friday

Barbell Flat Press: 3 sets, 5-10 reps

Incline Dumbbell Press: 3 sets, 10-20 reps

Cable Flyes 2 sets: 20-30 reps

Incline Barbell Press: 3 sets, 5-10 reps 

Dumbbell Flyes 3 sets: 10-20 reps

 

Weighted Pushups: 2 sets, 20-30 reps

 

Barbell Overhead Press: 2 sets, 5-10 reps

Seated Dumbbell Shoulder Press: 2 sets, 10-20 reps

 

x


Based on your personal responses to each of the main rep ranges, you can adjust how much volume you perform in any of them. For example, if you notice that you get a better stimulus (pumps, soreness, mind-muscle connection, etc.) and lower fatigue (joint stress, systemic fatigue, joint soreness, etc.) in some of the ranges vs. others, you can do more sets in those ranges and a bit less in others, though you should in most cases still include at least some work in the least productive ranges. For example, you might find that neither 10-20 nor 20-30 rep ranges work very well for your front delt training, you might just let them be picked up by chest training and focus your front delt-specific training on exclusively the 5-10 range. 

REST TIMES
When determining how long to rest between any two sets in training, our goal is for enough rest to be taken such that the next set is at least close to maximally productive. How can we ensure this? By answering 4 basic questions about our recovery status:

Has the target muscle locally recovered enough to do at least 5 reps on the next set?
Has the nervous system recovered enough to remove it as a limiting factor to target muscle performance?
Has the cardiorespiratory system recovered enough to remove it as a limiting factor to target muscle performance?
Have synergist muscles in the exercise being performed recovered enough to remove them as a limiting factor to target muscle performance?
It might take only 1-2 minutes to recover very well (let’s say, 90%) on all of those factors, but because set to set recovery is asymptotic in nature, it might take another 3 minutes to get to 95% recovery and another 10 minutes more to get to 99% recovery. Since you only have so much time to spend in the gym, 10 “90% recovered sets” in 45 minutes of training is a much more anabolic stimulus than only 3 “99% recovered” sets in that same amount of time. Thus, our recommendation is to make sure you can clearly check all 4 boxes of recovery above, but to not wait much longer than what can be considered “very good” recovery in the incredibly inefficient quest for “near perfect recovery.” 

Here’s an example of what can be considered “very good” recovery between sets of front delt training. Before you do another set of shoulder presses, ask yourself:

Are my front delts still burning from the last set, or do they feel ok again?
Do I feel like I can push hard with my front delts again, and am I mentally ready for another hard set, or do I need more time to rest?
Is my breathing more or less back to normal, or is it still very heavy?
Are my forearms and triceps still very fatigued, or are they ready to support my front delts in the upcoming set of barbell shoulder presses?
If you can get the green light on all of these, you’re probably ready to do another set, and waiting much longer will almost certainly not be of benefit. 

You’ll notice that depending on the exercise and on the lifter, very different rest times will be generated by this questionnaire. For example, seated dumbbell shoulder presses don't use most of the body and require lighter absolute loads, because of this they don't tax the central and cardiorespiratory systems much. Taking these variables into consideration one could presume that resting with as little as 45 seconds between sets may suffice. On the other hand, standing barbell presses use almost all body muscles for stability and thus might require 3 minutes between sets just to regain normal breathing. And if you’re on the larger and stronger side of things, and your cardio isn’t great, you’ll be resting much longer than someone smaller, not as strong, and in excellent cardio shape. While average rest times between sets of front delt training will be between 45 seconds and 3 minutes, the most important consideration is to take the rest time you need, and not copy someone else’s, rush the process, or sit around needlessly for minutes after all 4 factors are good to go for your next set to commence.   

FREQUENCY
There are two main considerations for determining training frequency. The first is the duration of the increase in muscle growth seen after a bout of training between MEV and MRV. If such an increase in muscle growth lasts 7 days, then perhaps a once a week frequency is optimal. If such an increase lasts only a day, then perhaps 6 days a week for the same muscle group is much better. While direct research on muscle growth timecourses is very limited, it seems that typical training might cause a reliable 24-48 hour increase in muscle growth. This would mean that if muscle growth elevation was the only variable of concern with regards to frequency, we should train every muscle 3-6 times per week. 

However, the second main consideration on determining training frequency is recovery. A single bout of training between MEV and MRV causes muscle growth to occur, but it also presents some degree of fatigue. If we are to progress in training and allow adaptations to fully take hold over days and weeks, we must allow enough time to elapse between overloading sessions for at least most fatigue to dissipate. On average, the exact amount of fatigue dissipation must be at least enough to allow performance to return to baseline or higher, such that an overload can be presented. In other words, if you can normally barbell press 135 for 15 reps, asking yourself “when should my next front delt workout be after this last one” can be answered by “when will you be recovered enough to be able to press at least 135 for 15 reps?” The timecourse of fatigue is usually a bit longer than that of muscle growth, unfortunately, so that for most people, recovery, not muscle growth cessation, will be the limiting factor on frequency. In most per-session MEV-MRV training volumes, fatigue will take between 1-2 days to come back down enough to restore or improve on past performance, and that highly depends on the muscle in question and even the exercises used.

How do you determine what training frequency is appropriate for you? You can start by training your front delts at per-session MEV volumes. After each session, you note when soreness has abated and when you feel recovered enough psychologically to attempt another overloading workout. When you’re ready, and no later, go back to the gym and train front delts again, with volumes just a bit higher than MEV (using the RP Set Progression Algorithm found in this article). If you’re recovering on time, keep coming back and training your front delts as often as you have been. If you notice that you need more time to recover, add a day to your next post-front delt-training window. If you’re recovering faster than you thought you could, train a bit more often. After a mesocycle of such adjustments, you will have a rough but very good guess as to what your average front delt training frequency can be for most of your programs going forward. In fact, your frequency will not only be tailored exactly to your responses, but you’ll be pretty sure it’s close to optimal because it was literally derived from how fast you can recover; which is the very primary variable that determines frequency.

Just so that you have some expectation of where to start, most individuals can recover from front delt training at a timecourse that allows for 2-3 sessions of front delts per week at MEV-MRV volumes in the context of normal chest training. However, only through direct experimentation on yourself can you tell where in this range is best for you and if maybe you’re even outside of this range. Just remember that so long as you’re recovered to train again (can perform at or above normal levels), training is a better idea than waiting to train, because higher frequency programs, at least in the short term, have shown to generate more muscle growth than needlessly lower ones.  

To improve your training frequency, you can alternate exercise selections between successive front delt workouts. For example, if you do barbell presses on one day, you might do dumbbell presses or machine presses the next day, and so on. This rotation of slightly different exercises and movement patterns can take repeated stress off of very small and specific parts of your muscles and connective tissues, which might reduce chronic injury risk exposure.

Please note that when you’re determining your front delt training frequency, you’ll have to juggle it a lot with your chest training frequency, as unrecovered front delts can impede your chest training, and chest training itself can tax your front delts enough to require a frequency reduction for direct front delt training.


PERIODIZATION
There are a few relevant timescales in periodization:

The repetition (1-9 seconds)
The set (5-30 repetitions)
The exercise (1-5 sets) 
The session (2-6 exercises)
The day (0-2 sessions)
The microcycle (usually 1 week of training)
The mesocycle (3-12 weeks)
The block (1-4 mesocycles)
The macrocycle (1-4 blocks)
We’ve already covered the most important details on most of these timescales, so in this section, we’ll focus on a brief understanding of how to manipulate training over a typical mesocycle and training block.

A mesocycle is composed of two phases: the accumulation phase and the deload phase. The accumulation phase lasts as long as it takes to hit systemic MRV, which, because fatigue accumulates in MEV+ training, has to happen at some point. For beginners with very high recovery abilities, it can take up to 12 weeks of increasingly more demanding training for systemic MRV to be reached and a deload to be required. For very advanced lifters that have very strong, large, and volume-resistant muscles, it can take only 3-4 weeks of accumulation training to reach systemic MRV and need to deload. The deload phase is designed to bring down the fatigue from the accumulation phase, and it usually only lasts a week or so (one microcycle).

When you begin a mesocycle of training, you should probably begin at or close to your MEV for all the muscle groups you’d like to improve during that mesocycle, for reasons described extensively in our book on the subject of training volume. Week to week, you can manipulate working sets by using the Set Progression algorithm from the Training Volume Landmarks for Muscle Growth (link) article. You should seek to keep reps stable from week to week while letting your RIR decline from a 3 or 4 RIR start until it gets down to 0 (for exercises that don’t threaten the bar falling on you) or 1 (for those that do) in the last week of training. The way you keep the reps stable as RIR falls is by adding weight to the exercises you’re using. How much weight to add is a matter of an educated guess on your part. You want to add enough weight to get your target RIR with the same reps as last week. For example, if you did 100lbs last week for 10 reps on your first set of an exercise at 2 RIR, how much should you do next week to get 10 reps again but at 1 RIR? Well, you might think that adding 2.5lbs would be too easy, and you could honestly get 11 reps with that next week at 1 RIR, but adding 10lbs might require you to push to 0 RIR to get 10 reps, so you would just add 5lbs and that will probably take you where you need to be. If you’re making very rapid gains on an exercise, you might have a few weeks here and there where even though you increased weight by a bit, your RIR didn’t decline. You might have hit 8 reps at 100lbs at 3 RIR last week, and then hit 8 reps again at 3 RIR with 105lbs this week! This is a good thing, and lots of these weeks are how beginners can sometimes crank out up to 12 weeks of accumulation. Since getting to failure too soon is MUCH WORSE than getting there a bit slower, we recommend being conservative on nearly all weekly weight additions.

If you can’t realistically add weight, you can add reps. This might happen when, for example, you are using the 25lb dumbbells one week and then having to do the 30lbers next week, wildly slashing your reps. Just remember to stay within your general rep range and not leave it in any given meso. If you start at sets of about 5 reps, don’t add any more reps than will give you sets of 10, because that will take you out of the 5-10 range and no longer fulfill the needs of your training program in the way it was intended. If you start to exit a range by adding reps, add weight to take yourself back into that range, even if the increments are big and take you all the way down to the bottom of the range. Yes, this might mean that last week you were doing 20 reps with the 20lb dumbbells on your first set, and this week you’re back to only 10 reps with the 25lbers at the same or one less RIR, but that’s proper training!

Once you cannot tie previous reps in at least two consecutive sessions for a given muscle group, you have likely hit its local MRV, and need to reduce its training volume. Our recommendation is to take the next planned session with half of the planned working sets, half of the planned reps, and half of the load for recovery. In the session after, resume your load progression from before, but start at a number of sets halfway between where you started the meso and your MRV set number, and an RIR of around 2. Thus, for example, if you hit 100lbs for 10 reps on a first set last session (6 total sets in the session for that muscle group), whereas the week before, you hit 95lbs for 12 reps, your next workout can be 50lbs for 3 sets of about 5 reps. Then, next week, you resume with 105lbs, but shoot for 2 RIR and do 4 sets total, because you started the meso at 2 sets, and 4 is halfway between 2 and 6 sets. Continue to train normally after that until and unless you hit MRV again.

Systemic MRV is when you’re training so hard that your sleep quality declines, your appetite falls, and you might get sick more often. It’s also when nearly all of your muscles start to hit local MRVs at about the same time. Once that happens (and be honest with yourself when it does), stop the accumulation phase and begin the deload phase.

The deload can be done many ways, but our recommendation is to take sets to MEV for the whole week. The load should be week 1’s load for the first half of the week and ½ of week 1’s load for the second half. The reps should be roughly half of all week 1’s reps for all sets during the deload week. This makes the deload VERY EASY, which is the whole point, since hard training doesn’t bring down fatigue! You should feel refreshed and be craving hard training toward the end of your deload week if you’re setting it up correctly. 

Those are the basics of periodization over the mesocycle. The training block is a sequence of mesocycles strung together for one unifying purpose. For example, a muscle gain block may be 3 mesocycles of 6 weeks each, one after another, with weight gain the goal for all 18 of those total weeks, or a fat loss block might be 2 mesocycles of 5 weeks long during which weight loss is the goal for all 10 of those weeks.

Though we can potentially alter all training variables over a training block, frequency, exercise selection, and loading are definitely noteworthy.

Frequency Periodization

When you start a training block, your MEVs are very low and so are your weekly MRVs. Thus, you can fit your total training volume relatively easily into lower frequencies, such as 2x per week per muscle group, for example. As training progresses and you start your next meso, not only do your per-session MEVs go up, but your weekly MRVs go up as well, making fitting all your training into just a few sessions more difficult. As well, you’re now quite used to the exercises, and recovery between sessions occurs much faster, allowing a higher frequency microcycle to be much more realistic. At this point, you can increase your frequency a bit, perhaps to an average of something like 3x per muscle group, for example. In the last one or two mesos, your per-session MEVs are very high and your per-week MRVs even higher. To really get the best gains, another bump in frequency is recommended, and you might go to 4x or so training per muscle group, and perhaps even higher. 

Unfortunately, super high frequencies might not be the most sustainable for a couple of reasons. First, muscles heal faster than connective tissues, and if you train with very high frequencies, sometimes your connective tissue recovery can lag behind your muscle recovery, which may set you up for injuries if unabated. Secondly, the sheer weekly volume that higher frequencies let you do productively might cause so much fatigue escalation as to not be sustainable for longer than a mesocycle or two. Thus, after training for a meso or two at your highest frequency, you might end the training block and seek to reduce the very high fatigue levels you have accumulated, in part by starting whatever phase you start next at lower frequencies.

Exercise Selection Periodization

For normal exercise selection decisions, you can just follow the 4-part exercise deletion and replacement guidelines in the variation section above. But as you add sessions from meso to meso with a climbing frequency, you’ll need to consider adding exercises. Yes, you can repeat exercises a few times in the week with different loads, but we recommend doing this sparingly, and more often adding in new exercises when you add new sessions as frequency climbs. Thus, you might start with an exercise on Monday and a different one on Thursday in a 2x meso, but when you move to 3x, you might have to add a new exercise on Friday, keeping the Monday exercise the same and moving the Thursday exercise to Wednesday. Because fatigue and wear and tear increase with each meso in a block, we recommend adding less systemically disruptive exercises more often than adding more disruptive ones. For example, you might consider adding some machine presses on that Friday 3x session but adding barbell presses to an already fatiguing week of front delt training might be overkill. Yes, you can add very tough movements as you go, but we recommend against it in most cases. Thus, you start with pretty much only or mostly basic, high-stress moves such as standing barbell presses and seated barbell presses earlier in the block, and later on add dumbbell seated presses, machine presses, and other such less fatiguing exercises as you add in sessions to expand frequency over the training block.

Loading Periodization

Whatever exercises you’ve carried over from one meso to the next should be done in the same rep ranges as they were done in the last mesos. For example, if you did barbell standing presses in the 5-10 rep range on a first set in the last meso, in the next meso, you should continue your loading progression to stay in that same rep range, which often means just adding small increments of weight from where you last left off in the last meso, or lightening up the weight just enough to get similar reps at 3-4 RIR again in the first week. But for new exercises added in each meso as frequency goes up, we recommend adding in the moderate (10-20) and light (20-30) rep ranges instead of the heavy (5-10) range. This recommendation occurs for two reasons. First, as you take on more wear and tear and fatigue, adding more 5-10 rep movements might cause a large increase in injury risk, especially now that you’re asking your body to perform with such heavy loads with even less recovery time between sessions. Secondly, very high rep (20-30) training seems to cause robust gains over a meso or two, but in part because your body adapts to buffering metabolites so quickly, might not work nearly as well for much longer. Thus, you may want to start with heavier training in the first meso of a block, keep it for all remaining mesos, and add in lighter training with new sessions as you go, which also pairs well with the selection of less fatiguing exercises. Here’s an example of how that might look for the delts:

 

 	Meso 1	Meso 2	Meso 3
Mon

Barbell Standing Presses (5-10)

Barbell Standing Presses (5-10)

Barbell Standing Presses (5-10)

Wed

x

Barbell Seated Presses (10-20)

Barbell Seated Presses (10-20)

Thurs

Barbell Seated Presses (10-20)

x

x

Fri

x

Dumbbell Presses (10-20)

Dumbbell Presses (10-20)

Sat

x

x

Machine Presses (20-30)


Once you’ve done a whole training block, you can do a mesocycle of low frequency (2x) training at MV with mostly 5-10 rep ranges and compound movements to resensitize your muscles to volume and growth again. This meso can take about a month and can be good to pair with maintenance eating to bring down any diet fatigue you might have from hard dieting in the last block. If you don’t have any real diet fatigue, you can instead take around 2 weeks of active rest (sometimes just one week if you count the deload after your last meso), where you train with 1x frequency for every muscle, with only about 2 working sets per muscle per session, and with weights that are around 50% of your 5-10 range, but doing them for only 5-10 reps per set. This ultra-easy training can make you ready for another whole block of training in the gym and can even be replaced with no training at all if you’re feeling really beat up or tired. Once you’ve taken this easy time, you’re probably ready to give another training block a go!


TRAINING MODALITIES
Straight Sets

Straight sets are sets performed to 0-4 RIR, with enough rest time to recover all 4 limiting factors (see the rest time section above for details).

These are excellent for the front delts, especially for presses, which can also provide an excellent heavy stimulus for the triceps as well.

Down Sets

Down sets are straight sets, but with less weight (usually 10-20% less) than the previous straight sets. By lowering the weight, you can keep reps over 5 per set, and/or keep the mind-muscle connection high and keep technique excellent to continue to have a high stimulus to fatigue ratio in every set of that exercise.  

Because of the low volume requirements of the front delts, down sets are rarely needed, though are an option if they are required.

Controlled Eccentrics and Pauses

Concentric, eccentric, and isometric phases of each exercise can be between half a second and 3 seconds long and still confer near-optimal effects on hypertrophy. In some cases, slowing down eccentrics and extending pauses can enhance technique, mind-muscle connection, and safety of the exercise.

Pauses and a high degree of control can really help with mind-muscle connection on the front delts and make heavy overhead presses safer.

Giant Sets 

Giant sets give you a certain weight to lift, an RIR range to hit (usually 0-4 RIR), and a goal of total reps over as many sets as it takes. An example is aiming to do 100lbs for however many sets it takes to get 60 total reps, while taking normal rest between each set. Such an approach can take the focus off of having to match or exceed the per-set reps you did last week, and can thus let you super-focus on technique and the mind-muscle connection, thus potentially improving both and getting more out of the training with exercises that can demand lots of technique and mind-muscle connection to be effective. If you’d like to be super precise in counting sets for your volume landmarks, we recommend counting giant sets at 2/3 of the contribution of straight sets, such that if you did 6 total sets to get to your giant set rep target, you can count that as 4 sets of “straight set equivalency” in terms of stimulus and fatigue. This discount is because with a higher focus on technique and mind-muscle connection and a lower focus on getting as many reps per set as possible, giant sets likely don’t cause as much fatigue as straight sets.

Mind-muscle connections are usually very easy for the front delts, and technique also not overly complicated, leaving giant sets a rare requisite in front delt training.

Myoreps

Myoreps are just like straight sets in that they must check all 4 recovery boxes before doing another set. However, they are different in two ways. First, while the first set is usually between 10-20 reps (0-2 RIR), the next multiple sets only rest long enough to get between 5 and 10 reps each. This is to maximize the ratio of effective (near-failure) reps to total reps over the multiple sets. Secondly, for all of those successive sets to register the highest number of effective reps per set, the local recovery factor (the muscle itself) must be by far the most limiting, so that successive sets are not limited by the nervous system, the lungs, and other muscles, allowing the final reps of each set to recruit and tense the fastest and most growth-prone motor units. For this to be possible, only isolation exercises without limiting synergists are appropriate for myoreps. If you’d like to be super precise in counting sets for your volume landmarks, we recommend counting myorep sets each as the equivalent of a straight set. While they do have fewer reps, they are often taken closer to failure and thus turn out to be about as fatiguing. 

These can be great to use in front raises, but the systemic fatigue in overhead presses is usually too high to allow for myorep use.

Drop Sets

Drop sets are exactly like myoreps, but with even shorter rest times because weight is reduced by 10-20% on average between each set. The effects are very similar. The advantage of drop sets is their time saving, and their slight disadvantage over myoreps is that dropping the weight a lot can reduce mind-muscle connection via reducing tension perception. If you’d like to be super precise in counting sets for your volume landmarks, we recommend counting drop sets each as the equivalent of a straight set. While they do have fewer reps and lighter loads, they are often taken closer to failure and in such rapid and painful succession that they turn out to be about as fatiguing.

Definitely possible in front raises of various sorts, especially in cable front raises, where drops can easily be done. Won’t work very well in presses, as systemic and synergist fatigue is usually too slow to recover.

Pre-Exhaust Supersets

These supersets begin with an isolation exercise for a given muscle group, and with no rest after taking it to 0-2 RIR, end with a compound exercise to which the target muscle is a big contributor. The local pre-exhaust of the isolation exercise allows the target muscle to be by far the limiting factor for the compound exercise that follows, and lets it be exposed to a few more effective reps than it otherwise would be if that compound was done fresh. After each 2-exercise superset, 4-factor rest is again taken until the next 2-exercise superset begins. If you’d like to be super precise in counting sets for your volume landmarks, we recommend counting pre-exhaust supersets as 1.5x as the equivalent of a straight set. This is because the compound exercise done in the second part of the set is only limited (highly) by the target pre-exhausted muscle, and this isn’t nearly as fatiguing, especially systemically, as it would be if it were done fresh.

If front delts are a big priority for you, using various front raises before overhead presses is an excellent way to stimulate the front delts and keep synergist and systemic fatigue very low to give the other muscles of your body more room in which to be stimulated and to recover.

Occlusion Sets

Occlusion training is myorep training with the limb occluded just above the muscle. This occlusion causes the local muscle and nerve to be far and away the limiting factors on recovery between sets, and thus allows you to focus in on a target muscle group that might have otherwise been difficult to reach with non-occluded movements. The big benefit is time saving, because rest between occluded sets is only long enough to get another 5 reps, and you can also use weights at the very low end of the growth range and even a bit lower (20-30% 1RM). The downside is that the local vasculature adapts very quickly to occlusion, so it might not be very effective for any more than a mesocycle or two in a row. Also, some muscles are much harder than others to occlude, or even impossible to occlude. If you’d like to be super precise in counting sets for your volume landmarks, we recommend counting occlusion sets each as the equivalent of 2/3 of a straight set, as they cause much less systemic fatigue due to the lower reps and weights used.

Occluding the front delts is at best very challenging, so we don’t recommend it.

GLUTE (GLUTES) GROWTH TRAINING TIPS

Updated: Jul 21, 2020

Let's also review our key training volume landmarks and relate them to training the glutes:   

MV = Maintenance Volume:
In almost every case, just doing squats and other quad work is more than enough to maintain glute gains. So that if you’ve really been beating up the glutes with direct work for multiple mesocycles and they need a break, don’t be afraid to remove all direct glute work for fear of losing gains… so long as you’re doing some squatting, your newfound glutes shouldn’t be going anywhere.

MEV = Minimum Effective Volume:
The minimum effective volume for most individuals is actually ZERO sets per week. But remember, that’s sets of direct work. What this means is that most individuals will get SOME glute growth, even in the long term, from not even training glutes directly, but training quads and hams, and thus engaging the glutes significantly.  If your desire is to grow your glutes more than their minimum potential, you’ve got to train them more, and just letting them get their stimulus indirectly from other leg work is no longer enough.

MAV = Maximum Adaptive Volume:
The maximum adaptive volume of a single session of any trained muscle group is still speculative, but research suggests it’s probably no lower than 4 working sets per session and no higher than 12 working sets per session in most intermediates. When you design your program and progressions, having lots of sessions with much fewer than 4 working sets per muscle group per session for multiple weeks on end might not be very efficient, and you might benefit from combining a few of these lower volume sessions to get the same volume but in fewer weekly sessions. Also, not exceeding 12 sets per session per muscle group for more than a few weeks is probably a good idea.

MRV = Maximum Recoverable Volume:
Most people seem to encounter serious recovery problems above 12 sets per week of glute training when done with 2 weekly sessions. 3 session can raise this to 18 or so sets per week, 4x to 25 sets per week, and 5-6 sessions to near 30 sets per week. Mind you, this is ON TOP OF a full complement of quad work and hamstring work. It’s worth noting that the exercises you choose to do for your glutes have a huge effect on your MRVs for them. Deadlift variations are incredible taxing, and may see your MRVs as low as 8-12 sets per week no matter the frequency. If you use mostly glute bridges and hip thrusts of various kinds, you’re likely to see MRVs of double or even triple those values. Per set, such easier exercises are probably not as stimulative to glute growth, but they are so much less fatiguing that any serious program prioritizing glute growth will include a lot of hip thrusts and bridges of various kinds.

EXERCISES
Barbell Hip Thrust
Barbell Walking Lunge
Cable Pull-Through
Deadlift
Deficit 25’s Deadlift
Deficit Deadlift
Dumbbell Walking Lunge
Machine Glute Kickback
Machine Hip Thrust
Reverse Lunge
Single Leg Hip Thrust
Split Squat
Sumo Deadlift
Sumo Deficit Deadlift
Sumo Squat
Trap Bar Deadlift
Dumbbell Reverse Lunge
Dumbbell Split Squat
Dumbbell Single Leg Hip Thrust
Wide Stance Belt Squat

VARIATION
When choosing your weekly glute exercises for maximal glute development (if you’re a bikini competitor, for example), you should make sure to do at least one compound glute move (like deficit sumo deadlifts) and one hip thrust move (like glute bridges) every week. It also pays to do some form of lunge on a regular basis, if not in every meso, then in most mesos.

Within a training session, we recommend including between 1 and 2 different glute exercises, but no more than that in most cases, as doing more than 2 glute movements in one session is likely just a needless burning of potential exercise variations you can save for later mesocycles. Within a single week (microcycle) of training, we recommend between 2 and 5 different glute exercises. For example, if you train glutes 3x a week, you can do a heavy deficit sumo pull on one day, a barbell hip thrust on the next day, and a lunge version on the last day for 3 total exercises in the week. On the other hand, if you train glute 6x per week, you might want to choose (though don’t have to choose) as many as 5 different exercises, with only one of them repeated in a heavier/lighter arrangement. Because you want to keep exercises variations fresh for when you need to change exercises (through injury or staleness, for example), you should use as few exercises per week (and thus, per mesocycle, as we recommend keeping the same exercises in every week of each meso) as you can to get the job done. If you can just do a few more sets of barbell hip thrusts and get a great workout, there’s no reason to switch to dumbbell single leg hip thrusts, for example. If you’re doing an exercise, there should be a reason for it.

Lastly, how do you know when it’s time to switch out a given exercise from your rotation to another exercise in your list of effective choices? The decision is based on answering just a few questions about the exercise you’re currently using:

Are you still making gains in rep strength on the exercise?
Is the exercise causing any aches or pains that are connective tissue related? And are these getting worse with each week or accumulating over multiple weeks?
Is there a phasic need for the exercise to change? In other words, is the exercise appropriate for the rep range you’re trying to use it for? Example: dumbbell lunges for sets of 5 might be unsafe, but sumo deficit deadlifts for sets of 5 are perfectly safe.
Are you getting a good mind-muscle connection on the exercise, or is it feeling stale and annoying to do?
If you are still hitting PRs on the exercise, it’s not causing any undue pains, you’re getting a good mind-muscle connection, and there’s no other need to change it, then don’t change it! If this means you keep an exercise around for up to a year or more, so be it! But if an exercise isn’t yielding any more PRs for a whole meso (especially on a muscle gain or maintenance phase), if it’s hurting you in the “bad” way, if it feels super stale, and/or if you have to dump it because it’s not appropriate to an upcoming rep range target, then you should replace it. Many times, the questions will fall on both sides, and then it’s up to you to make a wise choice considering all the 4 variables above.

RANGE OF MOTION
Stretching the glutes a ton is not realistic under heavy loads, but lunges should probably be done with rather long steps so that glute stretch can be significant. For full glute development, it also pays to make sure to really squeeze at the top of glute bridges and lunges. In addition, deep squats and deficit deadlifts (especially sumo) seem to hit the glutes very well, so full ROM is always a good idea.

LOADING
In general, like all muscles, the glutes benefit from weights in the 30%-85% 1RM range, which in many people roughly translates to a weight that results in between 5 and 30 reps on a first set taken to failure. We can split this range into heavy (5-10,) moderate (10-20), and light (20-30) categories, as there are tradeoffs to make between all of them.

The first point on loading is that the glutes, like most muscles, seem to benefit from some training in all three of the rep ranges listed above. Because the moderate (10-20 rep) range often offers the best tradeoff between stimulus, fatigue, injury risk, and slow/fast fiber specificity, and mind-muscle connection, an argument can be made that a first-time program design could have most weekly working sets for the glute in this range, perhaps up to about 50% of them. The other 50% can perhaps be split evenly between the heavy (5-10) and light (20-30) rep ranges, as loading range diversity has been shown to be a potential benefit in its own right. 

While the 10-20 range can support nearly all types of exercises, the other ranges have some practical delineations. For example, deadlifts should probably be done in the 5-10 range and not much higher, as the whole point of deadlifts is to impose high absolute forces. On the other hand, deadlift, sumo squats and other axially-loaded heavy movements that require one to support themselves in gravity-resistant posture are best not done in the 20-30 rep range because the duration of such a set may fatigue supporting muscles before the glutes themselves are fatigued, thus preventing true failure proximity and thus best gains in the glutes. Lunges are not likely the safest in the 5-10 range, especially if they are walking lunges, but are excellent in the 20-30 range.

When constructing a weekly training plan, it’s probably a good idea to train the heavy ranges before the lighter ranges. Because both types of training cause fatigue, they all interfere with each other to some extent. However, the muscle and connective tissue damage from heavier training is likely more substantial and presents a higher risk of injury if some damage already exists from earlier training. Thus, if you do sets of 5-10 on Monday and (nearly always) sustain some form of micro-tearing, sets of 10-20 on Wednesday are lower in absolute force magnitude and are unlikely to cause the micro-tearing to expand into a notable injury. On the other hand, if you’re pre-damaged from lots of sets of 10-20 on Monday, going even heavier in such a state on Wednesday in the 5-10 range is a bit more likely to result in injury. Thus, a potential sequencing of heavy-moderate-light during the week might be advisable, with a day or two of extra rest after the light session and before the next heavy session to make sure most damage has been healed and another productive week can begin. 

A sample arrangement of exercises, sets, and loads can look something like this:



Monday	Wednesday	Friday

Barbell Hip Thrusts: 3 sets, 5-10 reps

Barbell Single-Leg Hip Thrusts: 5 sets, 10-20 reps

Barbell Walking Lunges: 4 sets, 20-30 reps

Sumo Deficit Deadlifts: 3 sets, 5-10 reps 

Sumo Squats: 3 sets, 10-20 reps

x

x

x

x


Based on your personal responses to each of the main rep ranges, you can adjust how much volume you perform in any of them. For example, if you notice that you get a better stimulus (pumps, soreness, mind-muscle connection, etc.) and lower fatigue (joint stress, systemic fatigue, joint soreness, etc.) in some of the ranges vs. others, you can do more sets in those ranges and a bit less in others, though you should in most cases still include at least some work in the least productive ranges. For example, you might find that neither 5-10 nor 20-30 rep ranges work very well for your glute training, so you might only do a few sets of both in most weeks and do the vast majority of your sets in the 10-20 range.

REST TIMES
When determining how long to rest between any two sets in training, our goal is for enough rest to be taken such that the next set is at least close to maximally productive. How can we ensure this? By answering 4 basic questions about our recovery status:

Has the target muscle locally recovered enough to do at least 5 reps on the next set?
Has the nervous system recovered enough to remove it as a limiting factor to target muscle performance?
Has the cardiorespiratory system recovered enough to remove it as a limiting factor to target muscle performance?
Have synergist muscles in the exercise being performed recovered enough to remove them as a limiting factor to target muscle performance?
It might take only 1-2 minutes to recover very well (let’s say, 90%) on all of those factors, but because set to set recovery is asymptotic in nature, it might take another 3 minutes to get to 95% recovery and another 10 minutes more to get to 99% recovery. Since you only have so much time to spend in the gym, 10 “90% recovered sets” in 45 minutes of training is a much more anabolic stimulus than only 3 “99% recovered” sets in that same amount of time. Thus, our recommendation is to make sure you can clearly check all 4 boxes of recovery above, but to not wait much longer than what can be considered “very good” recovery in the incredibly inefficient quest for “near perfect recovery.” 

Here’s an example of what can be considered “very good” recovery between sets of glute training. Before you do another set of lunges, ask yourself:

Are my glutes still burning from the last set, or do they feel ok again?
Do I feel like I can push hard with my glutes again, and I am mentally ready for another hard set, or do I need more time to rest?
Is my breathing more or less back to normal, or is it still very heavy?
Are my quads and lower back still very fatigued, or are they ready to support my glutes in the upcoming set of walking lunges?
If you can get the green light on all of these, you’re probably ready to do another set, and waiting much longer will almost certainly not be of benefit. 

You’ll notice that depending on the exercise and on the lifter, very different rest times will be generated by this questionnaire. For example, machine kickbacks do not require much body support and are only done one glute at a time, so they tax the #2 and #3 fatigue sources very little, and rest times can be less than 45 seconds, whereas sumo deficit deadlifts might need 3 minutes between sets just to regain normal breathing. And if you’re on the larger and stronger side of things, and your cardio isn’t great, you’ll be resting much longer than someone smaller, not as strong, and in excellent cardio shape. While average rest times between sets of glute training will be between 45 seconds seconds and 3 minutes, the most important consideration is to take the rest time you need, and not copy someone else’s, rush the process, or sit around needlessly for minutes after all 4 factors are good to go for your next set to commence.  

FREQUENCY
There are two main considerations for determining training frequency. The first is the duration of the increase in muscle growth seen after a bout of training between MEV and MRV. If such an increase in muscle growth lasts 7 days, then perhaps a once a week frequency is optimal. If such an increase lasts only a day, then perhaps 6 days a week for the same muscle group is much better. While direct research on muscle growth timecourses is very limited, it seems that typical training might cause a reliable 24-48 hour increase in muscle growth. This would mean that if muscle growth elevation was the only variable of concern with regards to frequency, we should train every muscle 3-6 times per week. 

However, the second main consideration on determining training frequency is recovery. A single bout of training between MEV and MRV causes muscle growth to occur, but it also presents some degree of fatigue. If we are to progress in training and allow adaptations to fully take hold over days and weeks, we must allow enough time to elapse between overloading sessions for at least most fatigue to dissipate. On average, the exact amount of fatigue dissipation must be at least enough to allow performance to return to baseline or higher, such than an overload can be presented. In other words, if you can normally hip thrust 225 for 15 reps, asking yourself “when should my next glute workout be after this last one” can be answered by “when will you be recovered enough to be able to hip thrust at least 225 for 15 reps?” The timecourse of fatigue is usually a bit longer than that of muscle growth, unfortunately, so that for most people, recovery, not muscle growth cessation, will be the limiting factor on frequency. In most per-session MEV-MRV training volumes, fatigue will take between 1-2 days to come back down enough to restore or improve on past performance, and that highly depends on the muscle in question and even the exercises used. 

How do you determine what training frequency is appropriate for you? You can start by training your glutes at per-session MEV volumes. After each session, you note when soreness has abated and when you feel recovered enough psychologically to attempt another overloading workout. When you’re ready, and no later, go back to the gym and train glutes again, with volumes just a bit higher than MEV (using the RP Set Progression Algorithm). If you’re recovering on time, keep coming back and training your glutes as often as you have been. If you notice that you need more time to recover, add a day to your next post-glute-training window. If you’re recovering faster than you thought you could, train a bit more often. After a mesocycle of such adjustments, you will have a rough but very good guess as to what your average glute training frequency can be for most of your programs going forward. In fact, your frequency will not only be tailored exactly to your responses, but you’ll be pretty sure it’s close to optimal because it was literally derived from how fast you can recover; which is the very primary variable that determines frequency. 

Just so that you have some expectation of where to start, most individuals can recover from glute training at a timecourse that allows for 2-5 sessions of glutes per week at MEV-MRV volumes. However, only through direct experimentation on yourself can you tell where in this range is best for you and if maybe you’re even outside of this range. Just remember that so long as you’re recovered to train again (can perform at or above normal levels), training is a better idea than waiting to train, because higher frequency programs, at least in the short term, have shown to generate more muscle growth than needlessly lower ones. 

To improve your training frequency, you can alternate exercise selections between successive glute workouts. For example, if you do barbell hip thrusts on one day, you might do single-leg hip thrusts or machine kickbacks the next day, and so on. This rotation of slightly different exercises and movement patterns can take repeated stress off of very small and specific parts of your muscles and connective tissues, which might reduce chronic injury risk exposure.

Please note that when you’re determining your glute training frequency, you’ll have to juggle it a bit with your quad training frequency, as unrecovered glutes can impede your quad training, and even quad training itself can tax your glutes enough to require a frequency reduction for direct glute training. Also, because deadlifts are exceptionally fatiguing, we don’t recommend starting with any more than one deadlift session per week and never working up to more than two at most for most individuals.


PERIODIZATION
There are a few relevant timescales in periodization:

The repetition (1-9 seconds)
The set (5-30 repetitions)
The exercise (1-5 sets) 
The session (2-6 exercises)
The day (0-2 sessions)
The microcycle (usually 1 week of training)
The mesocycle (3-12 weeks)
The block (1-4 mesocycles)
The macrocycle (1-4 blocks)
We’ve already covered the most important details on most of these timescales, so in this section, we’ll focus on a brief understanding of how to manipulate training over a typical mesocycle and training block.

A mesocycle is composed of two phases: the accumulation phase and the deload phase. The accumulation phase lasts as long as it takes to hit systemic MRV, which, because fatigue accumulates in MEV+ training, has to happen at some point. For beginners with very high recovery abilities, it can take up to 12 weeks of increasingly more demanding training for systemic MRV to be reached and a deload to be required. For very advanced lifters that have very strong, large, and volume-resistant muscles, it can take only 3-4 weeks of accumulation training to reach systemic MRV and need to deload. The deload phase is designed to bring down the fatigue from the accumulation phase, and it usually only lasts a week or so (one microcycle).

When you begin a mesocycle of training, you should probably begin at or close to your MEV for all the muscle groups you’d like to improve during that mesocycle, for reasons described extensively in our book on the subject of training volume. Week to week, you can manipulate working sets by using the Set Progression algorithm from the Training Volume Landmarks for Muscle Growth (link) article. You should seek to keep reps stable from week to week while letting your RIR decline from a 3 or 4 RIR start until it gets down to 0 (for exercises that don’t threaten the bar falling on you) or 1 (for those that do) in the last week of training. The way you keep the reps stable as RIR falls is by adding weight to the exercises you’re using. How much weight to add is a matter of an educated guess on your part. You want to add enough weight to get your target RIR with the same reps as last week. For example, if you did 100lbs last week for 10 reps on your first set of an exercise at 2 RIR, how much should you do next week to get 10 reps again but at 1 RIR? Well, you might think that adding 2.5lbs would be too easy, and you could honestly get 11 reps with that next week at 1 RIR, but adding 10lbs might require you to push to 0 RIR to get 10 reps, so you would just add 5lbs and that will probably take you where you need to be. If you’re making very rapid gains on an exercise, you might have a few weeks here and there where even though you increased weight by a bit, your RIR didn’t decline. You might have hit 8 reps at 100lbs at 3 RIR last week, and then hit 8 reps again at 3 RIR with 105lbs this week! This is a good thing, and lots of these weeks are how beginners can sometimes crank out up to 12 weeks of accumulation. Since getting to failure too soon is MUCH WORSE than getting there a bit slower, we recommend being conservative on nearly all weekly weight additions.

If you can’t realistically add weight, you can add reps. This might happen when, for example, you are using the 25lb dumbbells one week and then having to do the 30lbers next week, wildly slashing your reps. Just remember to stay within your general rep range and not leave it in any given meso. If you start at sets of about 5 reps, don’t add any more reps than will give you sets of 10, because that will take you out of the 5-10 range and no longer fullfill the needs of your training program in the way it was intended. If you start to exit a range by adding reps, add weight to take yourself back into that range, even if the increments are big and take you all the way down to the bottom of the range. Yes, this might mean that last week you were doing 20 reps with the 20lb dumbbells on your first set, and this week you’re back to only 10 reps with the 25lbers at the same or one less RIR, but that’s proper training!

Once you cannot tie previous reps in at least two consecutive sessions for a given muscle group, you have likely hit its local MRV, and need to reduce its training volume. Our recommendation is to take the next planned session with half of the planned working sets, half of the planned reps, and half of the load for recovery. In the session after, resume your load progression from before, but start at a number of sets halfway between where you started the meso and your MRV set number, and an RIR of around 2. Thus, for example, if you hit 100lbs for 10 reps on a first set last session (6 total sets in the session for that muscle group), whereas the week before, you hit 95lbs for 12 reps, your next workout can be 50lbs for 3 sets of about 5 reps. Then, next week, you resume with 105lbs, but shoot for 2 RIR and do 4 sets total, because you started the meso at 2 sets, and 4 is halfway between 2 and 6 sets. Continue to train normally after that until and unless you hit MRV again.

Systemic MRV is when you’re training so hard that your sleep quality declines, your appetite falls, and you might get sick more often. It’s also when nearly all of your muscles start to hit local MRVs at about the same time. Once that happens (and be honest with yourself when it does), stop the accumulation phase and begin the deload phase.

The deload can be done many ways, but our recommendation is to take sets to MEV for the whole week. The load should be week 1’s load for the first half of the week and ½ of week 1’s load for the second half. The reps should be roughly half of all week 1’s reps for all sets during the deload week. This makes the deload VERY EASY, which is the whole point, since hard training doesn’t bring down fatigue! You should feel refreshed and be craving hard training toward the end of your deload week if you’re setting it up correctly. 

Those are the basics of periodization over the mesocycle. The training block is a sequence of mesocycles strung together for one unifying purpose. For example, a muscle gain block may be 3 mesocycles of 6 weeks each, one after another, with weight gain the goal for all 18 of those total weeks, or a fat loss block might be 2 mesocycles of 5 weeks long during which weight loss is the goal for all 10 of those weeks.

Though we can potentially alter all training variables over a training block, frequency, exercise selection, and loading are definitely noteworthy.

Frequency Periodization

When you start a training block, your MEVs are very low and so are your weekly MRVs. Thus, you can fit your total training volume relatively easily into lower frequencies, such as 2x per week per muscle group, for example. As training progresses and you start your next meso, not only do your per-session MEVs go up, but your weekly MRVs go up as well, making fitting all your training into just a few sessions more difficult. As well, you’re now quite used to the exercises, and recovery between sessions occurs much faster, allowing a higher frequency microcycle to be much more realistic. At this point, you can increase your frequency a bit, perhaps to an average of something like 3x per muscle group, for example. In the last one or two mesos, your per-session MEVs are very high and your per-week MRVs even higher. To really get the best gains, another bump in frequency is recommended, and you might go to 4x or so training per muscle group, and perhaps even higher. 

Unfortunately, super high frequencies might not be the most sustainable for a couple of reasons. First, muscles heal faster than connective tissues, and if you train with very high frequencies, sometimes your connective tissue recovery can lag behind your muscle recovery, which may set you up for injuries if unabated. Secondly, the sheer weekly volume that higher frequencies let you do productively might cause so much fatigue escalation as to not be sustainable for longer than a mesocycle or two. Thus, after training for a meso or two at your highest frequency, you might end the training block and seek to reduce the very high fatigue levels you have accumulated, in part by starting whatever phase you start next at lower frequencies.

Exercise Selection Periodization

For normal exercise selection decisions, you can just follow the 4-part exercise deletion and replacement guidelines in the variation section above. But as you add sessions from meso to meso with a climbing frequency, you’ll need to consider adding exercises. Yes, you can repeat exercises a few times in the week with different loads, but we recommend doing this sparingly, and more often adding in new exercises when you add new sessions as frequency climbs. Thus, you might start with an exercise on Monday and a different one on Thursday in a 2x meso, but when you move to 3x, you might have to add a new exercise on Friday, keeping the Monday exercise the same and moving the Thursday exercise to Wednesday. Because fatigue and wear and tear increase with each meso in a block, we recommend adding less systemically disruptive exercises more often than adding more disruptive ones. For example, you might consider adding some hip thrusts on that Friday 3x session but adding sumo deficit deadlifts to an already fatiguing week of glute training might be overkill. Yes, you can add very tough movements as you go, but we recommend against it in most cases. Thus, you start with pretty much only or mostly basic, high-stress moves such as sumo deficit deadlifts and sumo squats earlier in the block, and later on add hip thrusts, machine kickbacks, and other such less fatiguing exercises as you add in sessions to expand frequency over the training block. 

Loading Periodization

Whatever exercises you’ve carried over from one meso to the next should be done in the same rep ranges as they were done in the last mesos. For example, if you did sumo deficit deadlifts in the 5-10 rep range on a first set in the last meso, in the next meso, you should continue your loading progression to stay in that same rep range, which often means just adding small increments of weight from where you last left off in the last meso, or lightening up the weight just enough to get similar reps at 3-4 RIR again in the first week. But for new exercises added in each meso as frequency goes up, we recommend adding in the moderate (10-20) and light (20-30) rep ranges instead of the heavy (5-10) range. This recommendation occurs for two reasons. First, as you take on more wear and tear and fatigue, adding more 5-10 rep movements might cause a large increase in injury risk, especially now that you’re asking your body to perform with such heavy loads with even less recovery time between sessions. Secondly, very high rep (20-30) training seems to cause robust gains over a meso or two, but in part because your body adapts to buffering metabolites so quickly, might not work nearly as well for much longer. Thus, you may want to start with heavier training in the first meso of a block, keep it for all remaining mesos, and add in lighter training with new sessions as you go, which also pairs well with the selection of less fatiguing exercises. Here’s an example of how that might look for the glutes:

 

 	Meso 1	Meso 2	Meso 3
Mon

Sumo Deficit Deadlift (5-10)

Sumo Deficit Deadlifts (5-10)

Sumo Deficit Deadlifts (5-10)

Wed

x

Sumo Squats (10-20)

Sumo Squats (10-20)

Thurs

Sumo Squats (10-20)

x

x

Fri

x

Hip Thrusts (10-20)

Hip Thrusts (10-20)

Sat

x

x

Machine Kickbacks (20-30)

Once you’ve done a whole training block, you can do a mesocycle of low frequency (2x) training at MV with mostly 5-10 rep ranges and compound movements to resensitize your muscles to volume and growth again. This meso can take about a month and can be good to pair with maintenance eating to bring down any diet fatigue you might have from hard dieting in the last block. If you don’t have any real diet fatigue, you can instead take around 2 weeks of active rest (sometimes just one week if you count the deload after your last meso), where you train with 1x frequency for every muscle, with only about 2 working sets per muscle per session, and with weights that are around 50% of your 5-10 range, but doing them for only 5-10 reps per set. This ultra-easy training can make you ready for another whole block of training in the gym and can even be replaced with no training at all if you’re feeling really beat up or tired. Once you’ve taken this easy time, you’re probably ready to give another training block a go!


TRAINING MODALITIES
Straight Sets

Straight sets are sets performed to 0-4 RIR, with enough rest time to recover all 4 limiting factors (see the rest time section above for details).

Straight sets are excellent for the glutes, since their training is usually so systemically and synergistically fatiguing. 

Down Sets

Down sets are straight sets, but with less weight (usually 10-20% less) than the previous straight sets. By lowering the weight, you can keep reps over 5 per set, and/or keep the mind-muscle connection high and keep technique excellent to continue to have a high stimulus to fatigue ratio in every set of that exercise.  

Down sets can be an excellent tool for glute training, especially as fatigue goes up on various hip thrusts and the mind-muscle connection might falter. With glutes, the mind-muscle connection seems best at the lightest loads and worst at the heaviest, making down sets more useful for glute training than they are for many other muscles.

Controlled Eccentrics and Pauses

Concentric, eccentric, and isometric phases of each exercise can be between half a second and 3 seconds long and still confer near-optimal effects on hypertrophy. In some cases, slowing down eccentrics and extending pauses can enhance technique, mind-muscle connection, and safety of the exercise.

While the glutes get an excellent stretch from full-rom training anyway and almost never get injured, they do benefit greatly from an extended peak contraction hold, especially in hip thrusts and kickbacks of various sorts, where that last several inches of push at the top is where much of the glute involvement occurs.

Giant Sets 

Giant sets give you a certain weight to lift, an RIR range to hit (usually 0-4 RIR), and a goal of total reps over as many sets as it takes. An example is aiming to do 100lbs for however many sets it takes to get 60 total reps, while taking normal rest between each set. Such an approach can take the focus off of having to match or exceed the per-set reps you did last week, and can thus let you super-focus on technique and the mind-muscle connection, thus potentially improving both and getting more out of the training with exercises that can demand lots of technique and mind-muscle connection to be effective. If you’d like to be super precise in counting sets for your volume landmarks, we recommend counting giant sets at 2/3 of the contribution of straight sets, such that if you did 6 total sets to get to your giant set rep target, you can count that as 4 sets of “straight set equivalency” in terms of stimulus and fatigue. This discount is because with a higher focus on technique and mind-muscle connection and a lower focus on getting as many reps per set as possible, giant sets likely don’t cause as much fatigue as straight sets.

These come in very handy especially when first learning how to develop a mind-muscle connection with glute bridges. Glute bridges are very, very easy to just “rep out” with much worse glute involvement than is possible if you really focus on the technique and mind-muscle connection of each rep and not on just getting a certain number of reps.

Myoreps

Myoreps are just like straight sets in that they must check all 4 recovery boxes before doing another set. However, they are different in two ways. First, while the first set is usually between 10-20 reps (0-2 RIR), the next multiple sets only rest long enough to get between 5 and 10 reps each. This is to maximize the ratio of effective (near-failure) reps to total reps over the multiple sets. Secondly, for all of those successive sets to register the highest number of effective reps per set, the local recovery factor (the muscle itself) must be by far the most limiting, so that successive sets are not limited by the nervous system, the lungs, and other muscles, allowing the final reps of each set to recruit and tense the fastest and most growth-prone motor units. For this to be possible, only isolation exercises without limiting synergists are appropriate for myoreps. If you’d like to be super precise in counting sets for your volume landmarks, we recommend counting myorep sets each as the equivalent of a straight set. While they do have fewer reps, they are often taken closer to failure and thus turn out to be about as fatiguing. 

Myoreps can come in handy on walking lunges, kickbacks, and glute bridges. However, various squats and deadlifts are so systemically fatiguing that myoreps are wildly inappropriate with them.

Drop Sets

Drop sets are exactly like myoreps, but with even shorter rest times because weight is reduced by 10-20% on average between each set. The effects are very similar. The advantage of drop sets is their time saving, and their slight disadvantage over myoreps is that dropping the weight a lot can reduce mind-muscle connection via reducing tension perception. If you’d like to be super precise in counting sets for your volume landmarks, we recommend counting drop sets each as the equivalent of a straight set. While they do have fewer reps and lighter loads, they are often taken closer to failure and in such rapid and painful succession that they turn out to be about as fatiguing.

Because the glutes are so mind-muscle dependent, drop sets are not often the best way to approach glute training.

Pre-Exhaust Supersets

These supersets begin with an isolation exercise for a given muscle group, and with no rest after taking it to 0-2 RIR, end with a compound exercise to which the target muscle is a big contributor. The local pre-exhaust of the isolation exercise allows the target muscle to be by far the limiting factor for the compound exercise that follows, and lets it be exposed to a few more effective reps than it otherwise would be if that compound was done fresh. After each 2-exercise superset, 4-factor rest is again taken until the next 2-exercise superset begins. If you’d like to be super precise in counting sets for your volume landmarks, we recommend counting pre-exhaust supersets as 1.5x as the equivalent of a straight set. This is because the compound exercise done in the second part of the set is only limited (highly) by the target pre-exhausted muscle, and this isn’t nearly as fatiguing, especially systemically, as it would be if it were done fresh.

Because glute compounds are so systemically fatiguing, it can pay to pre-exhaust the glutes with more isolation work before beginning the compounds. For example, glute bridges before a set of lunges can be an excellent way to make the lunges much more limited by the glutes than by the quads, for example.

Occlusion Sets

Occlusion training is myorep training with the limb occluded just above the muscle. This occlusion causes the local muscle and nerve to be far and away the limiting factors on recovery between sets, and thus allows you to focus in on a target muscle group that might have otherwise been difficult to reach with non-occluded movements. The big benefit is time saving, because rest between occluded sets is only long enough to get another 5 reps, and you can also use weights at the very low end of the growth range and even a bit lower (20-30% 1RM). The downside is that the local vasculature adapts very quickly to occlusion, so it might not be very effective for any more than a mesocycle or two in a row. Also, some muscles are much harder than others to occlude, or even impossible to occlude. If you’d like to be super precise in counting sets for your volume landmarks, we recommend counting occlusion sets each as the equivalent of 2/3 of a straight set, as they cause much less systemic fatigue due to the lower reps and weights used.

It’s tough to occlude the glutes. It is possible, but this also occludes the quad, hams, and calves, and they can become limiting factors on occluded glute moves quite quickly.

HAMSTRING SIZE TRAINING TIPS

Updated: Feb 15, 2021

Let's also review our key training volume landmarks and relate them to training the back: 

MV = Maintenance Volume:
Perhaps around 3 sets per week are needed to maintain hamstring size for experienced trainers. The hamstrings are large muscle and experience a lot of damage and stimulus from heavy training, thus doesn’t require much to maintain their size in many cases. We recommend 2 weekly sessions for maintenance, so that’s 1-2 sets per session, but you can probably get away with one weekly ham session for 3 sets and still maintain in an isocaloric state, and can do up to 3 sessions at 1 set each as well.

MEV = Minimum Effective Volume:
Most intermediate-advanced lifters need at least 4 sets of direct hamstring work per week to make gains. If you’re training twice a week, that’s about 2 sets per session. It’s about 1-2 sets per session for 3x training, 1 sets for 4x training. Because the hamstrings take on so much muscle damage and cause so much systemic fatigue with proper training, we do not recommend them to be trained much more than 4x a week, especially on a regular basis.

MAV = Maximum Adaptive Volume:
The maximum adaptive volume of a single session of any trained muscle group is still speculative, but research suggests it’s probably no lower than 4 working sets per session and no higher than 12 working sets per session in most intermediates. When you design your program and progressions, having lots of sessions with much fewer than 4 working sets per muscle group per session for multiple weeks on end might not be very efficient, and you might benefit from combining a few of these lower volume sessions to get the same volume but in fewer weekly sessions. Also, not exceeding 12 sets per session per muscle group for more than a few weeks is probably a good idea. However, because the hamstrings are in a position of high damage exposure in many of their exercises, much more than 6 sets of hamstrings per session on a regular basis is unlikely to be optimal, and often 2-3 sets per session can be around MAV, especially at the beginning of a training block.

MRV = Maximum Recoverable Volume:
The MRV for most muscles depends highly on the number of sessions per week, but for the hamstrings, the total set count per week is quite similar between frequencies because the hamstrings take so long to recover. With 2 sessions, the average intermediate MRV for hams might be around 12 sets per week. With three sessions, it’s closer to 16 sets per week. With 4 sessions, it’s around maybe 18 sets, and with 5 or 6 weekly sessions, it might be no higher in many cases.  Individuals who have very good technique on hamstring training, have very strong hamstrings, or choose a lot of highly loaded hip hinges (such as stiff legged deadlifts and good mornings) will have lower MRVs because each set they do will be so much more fatiguing, though it will also be more stimulative. When we see reported hamstring MRVs of much more than 20 sets per week, we get quite skeptical about the technique and exercise selection being employed. In more harsh terms, if someone claims a hamstring MRV of 25 sets per week or more, there is a better chance that they’re using a lot of partial rep leg curls with a poor mind-muscle connection than their hamstring MRV actually being that high while using a combination of full ROM leg curls and hip hinges with excellent technique and focus.


EXERCISES
45 Degree Back Raise
Dumbbell Stiff Legged Deadlift
Glute Ham Raise
High Bar Good Morning
Low Bar Good Morning
Lying Leg Curl
Seated Leg Curl
Single Leg Curl
Stiff Legged Deadlift

VARIATION
Within a training session, we recommend sticking to only one hamstring exercise because the hamstrings usually have a very low volume requirement and tolerance. Within a single week (microcycle) of training, we recommend between 2 and 3 different hamstrings exercises. One of them should probably be a hip hinge of some kind (SLDL, GM, etc.) and at least one should be a leg curl of some kind. For example, if you train hamstrings 3x a week, you can do a heavy barbell stiff legged deadlift on one day, a lying hamstring curl on the next day, and a seated hamstring curl on the last day for 3 total exercises in the week. Because you want to keep exercises variations fresh for when you need to change exercises (through injury or staleness, for example), you should use as few exercises per week (and thus, per mesocycle, as we recommend keeping the same exercises in every week of each meso) as you can to get the job done. If you can just do a few more sets of seated leg curls and get a great workout, there’s no reason to switch one-leg seated curls, for example. If you’re doing an exercise, there should be a reason for it.

 

Lastly, how do you know when it’s time to switch out a given exercise from your rotation to another exercise in your list of effective choices? The decision is based on answering just a few questions about the exercise you’re currently using:

Are you still making gains in rep strength on the exercise?
Is the exercise causing any aches or pains that are connective tissue related? And are these getting worse with each week or several weeks?
Is there a phasic need for the exercise to change? In other words, is the exercise appropriate for the rep range you’re trying to use it for? Example: barbell stiff legged deadlifts for sets of 25 just tire out your lower back, but seated leg curls for 25 fry out your hamstrings as intended.
Are you getting a good mind-muscle connection on the exercise, or is it feeling stale and annoying to do?
If you are still hitting PRs on the exercise, it’s not causing any undue pains, you’re getting a good mind-muscle connection, and there’s no other need to change it, then don’t change it! If this means you keep an exercise around for up to a year or more, so be it! But if an exercise isn’t yielding any more PRs for a whole meso (especially on a muscle gain or maintenance phase), if it’s hurting you in the “bad” way, if it feels super stale, and/or if you have to dump it because it’s not appropriate to an upcoming rep range target, then you should replace it. Many times, the questions will fall on both sides, and then it’s up to you to make a wise choice considering all the 4 variables above.

RANGE OF MOTION
In the hip hinge movements, you should bend at the hips (while keeping your lower back from rounding) and keep the knees just shy of lockout. You should bend deeply enough to cause a painful (but not overbearingly so) stretch in the hams on each rep. Come all the way up to reset and hit it again for the next rep. On the leg curls, you should always start from a fully extended knee and always bring the pad to touch your butt with each rep. If you can’t touch the pad to your butt, it doesn’t count as a rep!
Please make sure to do both exercise types with careful technique and under control. Bouncing out of reps can spell disaster for the hams.

LOADING
In general, like all muscles, the muscles of the hamstrings benefit from weights in the 30%-85% 1RM range, which in many people roughly translates to a weight that results in between 5 and 30 reps on a first set taken to failure. We can split this range into heavy (5-10,) moderate (10-20), and light (20-30) categories, as there are tradeoffs to make between all of them.

The first point on loading is that the hamstrings, like most muscles, seem to benefit from some training in all three of the rep ranges listed above. Because the moderate (10-20 rep) range often offers the best tradeoff between stimulus, fatigue, injury risk, and slow/fast fiber specificity, and mind-muscle connection, an argument can be made that a first-time program design could have most weekly working sets for the hamstrings in this range, perhaps up to about 50% of them. The other 50% can perhaps be split evenly between the heavy (5-10) and light (20-30) rep ranges, as loading range diversity has been shown to be a potential benefit in its own right. However, many lifters find that, especially in hip hinges, the hamstrings tend to respond best to the 5-10 range.

Hip hinges even for reps of just 10 and above may result in a fatigue of the postural muscles (spinal erectors, for example) before hamstring fatigue sets in, thus limiting hamstring stimulus and possibly leading to technical decay and heightened injury risk. Thus, hip hinges should likely be done mostly in the 5-10 rep range and leg curls in the 10-20 and 20-30 ranges.

When constructing a weekly training plan, it’s probably a good idea to train the heavy ranges before the lighter ranges. Because both types of training cause fatigue, they all interfere with each other to some extent. However, the muscle and connective tissue damage from heavier training is likely more substantial and presents a higher risk of injury if some damage already exists from earlier training. Thus, if you do sets of 5-10 on Monday and (nearly always) sustain some form of micro-tearing, sets of 10-20 on Wednesday are lower in absolute force magnitude and are unlikely to cause the micro-tearing to expand into a notable injury. On the other hand, if you’re pre-damaged from lots of sets of 10-20 on Monday, going even heavier in such a state on Wednesday in the 5-10 range is a bit more likely to result in injury. Thus, a potential sequencing of heavy-moderate-light during the week might be advisable, with a day or two of extra rest after the light session and before the next heavy session to make sure most damage has been healed and another productive week can begin.

A sample arrangement of exercises, sets, and loads can look something like this:

Monday:

Barbell Stiff-Legged Deadlifts 3 sets, 5-10 reps
Wednesday:

Lying Leg Curls 3 sets, 10-30 reps
Friday:

Seated Leg Curls 3 sets, 20-30 reps
Based on your personal responses to each of the main rep ranges, you can adjust how much volume you perform in any of them. For example, if you notice that you get a better stimulus (pumps, soreness, mind-muscle connection, etc.) and lower fatigue (joint stress, systemic fatigue, joint soreness, etc.) in some of the ranges vs. others, you can do more sets in those ranges and a bit less in others, though you should in most cases still include at least some work in the least productive ranges. For example, you might find that neither 5-10 nor 20-30 rep ranges work very well for your hamstring training, so you might only do a few sets of both in most weeks and do the vast majority of your sets in the 10-20 range. It is worth nothing that the hamstrings are often more likely to be faster twitch than many other muscles, and thus may benefit from a bias in loading toward the heavier (5-10 and 10-20) ranges.

REST TIMES
When determining how long to rest between any two sets in training, our goal is for enough rest to be taken such that the next set is at least close to maximally productive. How can we ensure this? By answering 4 basic questions about our recovery status:

Has the target muscle locally recovered to do at least 5 reps on the next set?
Has the nervous system recovered enough to remove it as a limiting factor to target muscle performance?
Has the cardiorespiratory system recovered enough to remove it as a limiting factor to target muscle performance?
Have synergist muscles in the exercise being performed recovered enough to remove them as a limiting factors to target muscle performance?
It might take only 1-2 minutes to recover very well (let’s say, 90%) on all of those factors, but because set to set recovery is asymptotic in nature, it might take another 3 minutes to get to 95% recovery and another 10 minutes more to get to 99% recovery. Since you only have so much time to spend in the gym, 10 “90% recovered sets” in 45 minutes of training is a much more anabolic stimulus than only 3 “99% recovered” sets in that same amount of time. Thus, our recommendation is to make sure you can clearly check all 4 boxes of recovery above, but to not wait much longer than what can be considered “very good” recovery in the incredibly inefficient quest for “near perfect recovery.”

Here’s an example of what can be considered “very good” recovery between sets of hamstring training. Before you do another set of good mornings, ask yourself:

 

Are my hamstrings still burning from the last set, or do they feel ok again?
Do I feel like I can pull hard with my hamstrings again, and I am mentally ready for another hard set, or do I need more time to rest?
Is my breathing more or less back to normal, or is it still very heavy?
Are my glutes and lower back still very fatigued, or are they ready to support my hamstrings in the upcoming set of good mornings?
If you can get the green light on all of these, you’re probably ready to do another set, and waiting much longer will almost certainly not be of benefit.

You’ll notice that depending on the exercise and on the lifter, very different rest times will be generated by this questionnaire. For example, seated leg curls might not even have synergist muscles, so question 4 doesn’t even apply and rest times can be less than 30 seconds, whereas barbell stiff legged deadlifts might need 3 minutes between sets just to regain normal breathing. And if you’re on the larger and stronger side of things, and your cardio isn’t great, you’ll be resting much longer than someone smaller, not as strong, and in excellent cardio shape. While average rest times between sets of hamstrings training will be between 30 seconds and 3 minutes, the most important consideration is to take the rest time you need, and not copy someone else’s, rush the process, or sit around needlessly for minutes after all 4 factors are good to go for your next set to commence.

FREQUENCY
There are two main considerations for determining training frequency. The first is the duration of the increase in muscle growth seen after a bout of training between MEV and MRV. If such an increase in muscle growth lasts 7 days, then perhaps a once a week frequency is optimal. If such an increase lasts only a day, then perhaps 6 days a week for the same muscle group is much better. While direct research on muscle growth timecourses is very limited, it seems that typical training might cause a reliable 24-48 hour increase in muscle growth. This would mean that if muscle growth elevation was the only variable of concern with regards to frequency, we should train every muscle 3-6 times per week.

However, the second main consideration on determining training frequency is recovery. A single bout of training between MEV and MRV causes muscle growth to occur, but it also presents some degree of fatigue. If we are to progress in training and allow adaptations to fully take hold over days and weeks, we must allow enough time to elapse between overloading sessions for at least most fatigue to dissipate. On average, the exact amount of fatigue dissipation must be at least enough to allow performance to return to baseline or higher, such than an overload can be presented. In other words, if you can normally hamstring curl 105 for 15 reps, asking yourself “when should my next hamstring workout be after this last one” can be answered by “when will you be recovered enough to be able to hamstring curl at least 105 for 15 reps?” The timecourse of fatigue is usually a bit longer than that of muscle growth, unfortunately, so that for most people, recovery, not muscle growth cessation, will be the limiting factor on frequency. In most per-session MEV-MRV training volumes, fatigue will take between 1-2 days to come back down enough to restore or improve on past performance, and that highly depends on the muscle in question and even the exercises used.

How do you determine what training frequency is appropriate for you? You can start by training your hamstrings at per-session MEV volumes. After each session, you note when soreness has abated and when you feel recovered enough psychologically to attempt another overloading workout. When you’re ready, and no later, go back to the gym and train hamstrings again, with volumes just a bit higher than MEV (using the RP Set Progression Algorithm). If you’re recovering on time, keep coming back and training your hamstrings as often as you have been. If you notice that you need more time to recover, add a day to your next post-hamstring-training window. If you’re recovering faster than you thought you could, train a bit more often. After a mesocycle of such adjustments, you will have a rough but very good guess as to what your average hamstring training frequency can be for most of your programs going forward. In fact, your frequency will not only be tailored exactly to your responses, but you’ll be pretty sure it’s close to optimal because it was literally derived from how fast you can recover; which is the very primary variable that determines frequency.

Just so that you have some expectation of where to start, most individuals can recover from hamstring training at a timecourse that allows for 2-3 sessions of hamstrings per week at MEV-MRV volumes. However, only through direct experimentation on yourself can you tell where in this range is best for you and if maybe you’re even outside of this range. Just remember that so long as you’re recovered to train again (can perform at or above normal levels), training is a better idea than waiting to train, because higher frequency programs, at least in the short term, have shown to generate more muscle growth than needlessly lower ones.

To improve your training frequency, you can alternate exercise selections between successive hamstring workouts. For example, if you do barbell stiff legged deadlifts on one day, you might do single-leg hamstring curls or lying leg curls the next day, and so on. This rotation of slightly different exercises and movement patterns can take repeated stress off of very small and specific parts of your muscles and connective tissues, which might reduce chronic injury risk exposure.



PERIODIZATION
There are a few relevant timescales in periodization:

The repetition (1-9 seconds)
The set (5-30 repetitions)
The exercise (1-5 sets)
The session (2-6 exercises)
The day (0-2 sessions)
The microcycle (usually 1 week of training)
The mesocycle (3-12 weeks)
The block (1-4 mesoscycles)
The macrocycle (1-4 blocks)
We’ve already covered the most important details on most of these timescales, so in this section, we’ll focus on a brief understanding of how to manipulate training over a typical mesocycle and training block.

A mesocycle is composed of two phases: the accumulation phase and the deload phase. The accumulation phase lasts as long as it takes to hit systemic MRV, which, because fatigue accumulates in MEV+ training, has to happen at some point. For beginners with very high recovery abilities, it can take up to 12 weeks of increasingly more demanding training for systemic MRV to be reached and a deload to be required. For very advanced lifters that have very strong, large, and volume-resistant muscles, it can take only 3-4 weeks of accumulation training to reach systemic MRV and need to deload. The deload phase is designed to bring down the fatigue from the accumulation phase, and it usually only lasts a week or so (one microcycle).

When you begin a mesocycle of training, you should probably begin at or close to your MEV for all the muscle groups you’d like to improve during that mesocycle, for reasons described extensively in our book on the subject of training volume. Week to week, you can manipulate working sets by using the Set Progression algorithm from the Training Volume Landmarks for Muscle Growth (link) article. You should seek to keep reps stable from week to week while letting your RIR decline from a 3 or 4 RIR start until it gets down to 0 (for exercises that don’t threaten the bar falling on you) or 1 (for those that do) in the last week of training. The way you keep the reps stable as RIR falls is by adding weight to the exercises you’re using. How much weight to add is a matter of an educated guess on your part. You want to add enough weight to get your target RIR with the same reps as last week. For example, if you did 100lbs last week for 10 reps on your first set of an exercise at 2 RIR, how much should you do next week to get 10 reps again but at 1 RIR? Well, you might think that adding 2.5lbs would be too easy, and you could honestly get 11 reps with that next week at 1 RIR, but adding 10lbs might require you to push to 0 RIR to get 10 reps, so you would just add 5lbs and that will probably take you where you need to be. If you’re making very rapid gains on an exercise, you might have a few weeks here and there where even though you increased weight by a bit, your RIR didn’t decline. You might have hit 8 reps at 100lbs at 3 RIR last week, and then hit 8 reps again at 3 RIR with 105lbs this week! This is a good thing, and lots of these weeks are how beginners can sometimes crank out up to 12 weeks of accumulation. Since getting to failure too soon is MUCH WORSE than getting there a bit slower, we recommend being conservative on nearly all weekly weight additions.

If you can’t realistically add weight, you can add reps. This might happen when, for example, you are using the 25lb dumbbells one week and then having to do the 30lbers next week, wildly slashing your reps. Just remember to stay within your general rep range and not leave it in any given meso. If you start at sets of about 5 reps, don’t add any more reps than will give you sets of 10, because that will take you out of the 5-10 range and no longer fulfil the needs of your training program in the way it was intended. If you start to exit a range by adding reps, add weight to take yourself back into that range, even if the increments are big and take you all the way down to the bottom of the range. Yes, this might mean that last week you were doing 20 reps with the 20lb dumbbells on your first set, and this week you’re back to only 10 reps with the 25lbers at the same or one less RIR, but that’s proper training!

Once you cannot tie previous reps in at least two consecutive sessions for a given muscle group, you have likely hit its local MRV, and need to reduce its training volume. Our recommendation is to take the next planned session with half of the planned working sets, half of the planned reps, and half of the load for recovery. In the session after, resume your load progression from before, but start at a number of sets halfway between where you started the meso and your MRV set number, and an RIR of around 2. Thus, for example, if you hit 100lbs for 10 reps on a first set last session (6 total sets in the session for that muscle group), whereas the week before, you hit 95lbs for 12 reps, your next workout can be 50lbs for 3 sets of about 5 reps. Then, next week, you resume with 105lbs, but shoot for 2 RIR and do 4 sets total, because you started the meso at 2 sets, and 4 is halfway between 2 and 6 sets. Continue to train normally after that until and unless you hit MRV again.

Systemic MRV is when you’re training so hard that your sleep quality declines, your appetite falls, and you might get sick more often. It’s also when nearly all of your muscles start to hit local MRVs at about the same time. Once that happens (and be honest with yourself when it does), stop the accumulation phase and begin the deload phase.

The deload can be done many ways, but our recommendation is to take sets to MEV for the whole week. The load should be week 1’s load for the first half of the week and ½ of week 1’s load for the second half. The reps should be roughly half of all week 1’s reps for all sets during the deload week. This makes the deload VERY EASY, which is the whole point, since hard training doesn’t bring down fatigue! You should feel refreshed and be craving hard training toward the end of your deload week if you’re setting it up correctly.

Those are the basics of periodization over the mesoscycle. The training block is a sequence of mesoscycles strung together for one unifying purpose. For example, a muscle gain block may be 3 mesocycles of 6 weeks each, one after another, with weight gain the goal for all 18 of those total weeks, or a fat loss block might be 2 mesocycles of 5 weeks long during which weight loss is the goal for all 10 of those weeks.

Though we can potentially alter all training variables over a training block, frequency, exercise selection, and loading are definitely noteworthy.

Frequency:
When you start a training block, your MEVs are very low and so are your weekly MRVs. Thus, you can fit your total training volume relatively easily into lower frequencies, such as 2x per week per muscle group, for example. As training progresses and you start your next meso, not only do your per-session MEVs go up, but your weekly MRVs go up as well, making fitting all your training into just a few sessions more difficult. As well, you’re now quite used to the exercises, and recovery between sessions occurs much faster, allowing a higher frequency microcycle to be much more realistic. At this point, you can increase your frequency a bit, perhaps to an average of something like 3x per muscle group, for example. In the last one or two mesos, your per-session MEVs are very high and your per-week MRVs even higher. To really get the best gains, another bump in frequency is recommended, and you might go to 4x or so training per muscle group, and perhaps even higher.

Unfortunately, super high frequencies might not be the most sustainable for a couple of reasons. First, muscles heal faster than connective tissues, and if you train with very high frequencies, sometimes your connective tissue recovery can lag behind your muscle recovery, which may set you up for injuries if unabated. Secondly, the sheer weekly volume that higher frequencies let you do productively might cause so much fatigue escalation as to not be sustainable for longer than a mesocycle or two. Thus, after training for a meso or two at your highest frequency, you might end the training block and seek to reduce the very high fatigue levels you have accumulated, in part by starting whatever phase you start next at lower frequencies.

Exercise Selection:
For normal exercise selection decisions, you can just follow the 4-part exercise deletion and replacement guidelines in the variation section above. But as you add sessions from meso to meso with a climbing frequency, you’ll need to consider adding exercises. Yes, you can repeat exercises a few times in the week with different loads, but we recommend doing this sparingly, and more often adding in new exercises when you add new sessions as frequency climbs. Thus, you might start with an exercise on Monday and a different one on Thursday in a 2x meso, but when you move to 3x, you might have to add a new exercise on Friday, keeping the Monday exercise the same and moving the Thursday exercise to Wednesday. Because fatigue and wear and tear increase with each meso in a block, we recommend adding less systemically disruptive exercises more often than adding more disruptive ones. For example, you might consider adding some seated leg curls on that Friday 3x session but adding stiff-legged deadlifts to an already fatiguing week of hamstring training might be overkill. Yes, you can add very tough movements as you go, but we recommend against it in most cases. Thus, you start with pretty much only or mostly basic, high-stress moves such as stiff-legged deadlifts and high-bar good-mornings  earlier in the block, and later on add seated leg curls, lying leg curls, and other such less fatiguing exercises as you add in sessions to expand frequency over the training block.

Loading:
Whatever exercises you’ve carried over from one meso to the next should be done in the same rep ranges as they were done in the last mesos. For example, if you did stiff-legged deadlifts in the 5-10 rep range on a first set in the last meso, in the next meso, you should continue your loading progression to stay in that same rep range, which often means just adding small increments of weight from where you last left off in the last meso, or lightening up the weight just enough to get similar reps at 3-4 RIR again in the first week. But for new exercises added in each meso as frequency goes up, we recommend adding in the moderate (10-20) and light (20-30) rep ranges instead of the heavy (5-10) range. This recommendation occurs for two reasons. First, as you take on more wear and tear and fatigue, adding more 5-10 rep movements might cause a large increase in injury risk, especially now that you’re asking your body to perform with such heavy loads with even less recovery time between sessions. Secondly, very high rep (20-30) training seems to cause robust gains over a meso or two, but in part because your body adapts to buffering metabolites so quickly, might not work nearly as well for much longer. Thus, you may want to start with heavier training in the first meso of a block, keep it for all remaining mesos, and add in lighter training with new sessions as you go, which also pairs well with the selection of less fatiguing exercises. Here’s an example of how that might look for the hams:

Meso 1:

Monday Stiff-Legged Deadlifts (5-10)
Thursday High-Bar Good-Mornings (10-20)
Meso 2:

Monday Stiff-Legged Deadlifts (5-10)
Wednesday High-Bar Good-Mornings (10-20)
Friday Lying Leg Curls (10-20)
Meso 3:

Monday Stiff-Legged Deadlifts (5-10)
Wednesday High-Bar Good-Mornings (10-20)
Friday Lying Leg Curls (10-20)
Saturday Seated leg curls (20-30)
Once you’ve done a whole training block, you can do a mesocycle of low frequency (2x) training at MV with mostly 5-10 rep ranges and compound movements to resensitize your muscles to volume and growth again. This meso can take about a month and can be good to pair with maintenance eating to bring down any diet fatigue you might have from hard dieting in the last block. If you don’t have any real diet fatigue, you can instead take around 2 weeks of active rest (sometimes just one week if you count the deload after your last meso), where you train with 1x frequency for every muscle, with only about 2 working sets per muscle per session, and with weights that are around 50% of your 5-10 range, but doing them for only 5-10 reps per set. This ultra-easy training can make you ready for another whole block of training in the gym and can even be replaced with no training at all if you’re feeling really beat up or tired. Once you’ve taken this easy time, you’re probably ready to give another training block a go!

TRAINING MODALITIES
Straight Sets
Straight sets are sets performed to 0-4 RIR, with enough rest time to recover all 4 limiting factors (see the rest time section above for details).
The hamstrings are very straightforward to train, are systemically fatiguing, and are often more fast-twitch dominant, so are ideally trained by straight sets.
Down Sets
Down sets are straight sets, but with less weight (usually 10-20% less) than the previous straight sets. By lowering the weight, you can keep reps over 5 per set, and/or keep the mind-muscle connection high and keep technique excellent to continue to have a high stimulus to fatigue ratio in every set of that exercise.  
Down sets can be excellent, especially because heavy hip hinges can so easily cause problems for the mind-muscle connection. A single lighter set of good mornings, for example, after a few heavier ones can add a lot of stimulus to the exercise.
Controlled Eccentrics and Pauses
Concentric, eccentric, and isometric phases of each exercise can be between half a second and 3 seconds long and still confer near-optimal effects on hypertrophy. In some cases, slowing down eccentrics and extending pauses can enhance technique, mind-muscle connection, and safety of the exercise.
Rapid reversals at the stretched position are a bad idea for hamstring safety, so either a pause or slow reversal at the bottom of all hip hinges and curls is likely wise. Peak contractions can be used on curls, but be careful not to overuse them at the expense of load.
Giant Sets 
Giant sets give you a certain weight to lift, an RIR range to hit (usually 0-4 RIR), and a goal of total reps over as many sets as it takes. An example is aiming to do 100lbs for however many sets it takes to get 60 total reps, while taking normal rest between each set. Such an approach can take the focus off of having to match or exceed the per-set reps you did last week, and can thus let you super-focus on technique and the mind-muscle connection, thus potentially improving both and getting more out of the training with exercises than can demand lots of technique and mind-muscle connection to be effective. If you’d like to be super precise in counting sets for your volume landmarks, we recommend counting giant sets at 2/3 of the contribution of straight sets, such that if you did 6 total sets to get to your giant set rep target, you can count that as 4 sets of “straight set equivalency” in terms of stimulus and fatigue. This discount is because with a higher focus on technique and mind-muscle connection and a lower focus on getting as many reps per set as possible, giant sets likely don’t cause as much fatigue as straight sets.
These can come in handy when learning difficult hip hinges like SLDLs and GMs, but are less useful for leg curls and for advanced lifters who have a good handle on the hinge technique.
Myoreps
Myoreps are just like straight sets in that they must check all 4 recovery boxes before doing another set. However, they are different in two ways. First, while the first set is usually between 10-20 reps (0-2 RIR), the next multiple sets only rest long enough to get between 5 and 10 reps each. This is to maximize the ratio of effective (near-failure) reps to total reps over the multiple sets. Secondly, for all of those successive sets to register the highest number of effective reps per set, the local recovery factor (the muscle and its motor nerve) must be by far the most limiting, so that successive sets are not limited by the CNS, the lungs, and other muscles and thus the final reps of each set really do recruit and tense the fastest and most growth-prone motor units. For this to be possible, only isolation exercises without limiting synergists are appropriate for myoreps. If you’d like to be super precise in counting sets for your volume landmarks, we recommend counting myorep sets each as the equivalent of a straight set. While they do have fewer reps, they are often taken closer to failure and thus turn out to be about as fatiguing.
While these can look excellent for leg curls on paper, sometimes hamstrings can accumulate so much lactic acid after a few sets of myoreps that the pain is overwhelming and can detract from mind-muscle connection and from failure proximity on subsequent sets. Do these with a fair warning!
Drop Sets
Drop sets are exactly like myoreps, but with even shorter rest times because weight is reduced by 10-20% on average between each set. The effects are very similar. The advantage of drop sets is their time saving, and their slight disadvantage over myoreps is that dropping the weight a lot can reduce mind-muscle connection via reducing tension perception. If you’d like to be super precise in counting sets for your volume landmarks, we recommend counting drop sets each as the equivalent of a straight set. While they do have fewer reps and lighter loads, they are often taken closer to failure and in such rapid and painful succession that they turn out to be about as fatiguing.
These can work on leg curls, but be sure not to go so light as to reduce the mind-muscle connection.
Pre-Exhaust Supersets
These supersets begin with an isolation exercise for a given muscle group, and with no rest after taking it to 0-2 RIR, end with a compound exercise to which the target muscle is a big contributor. The local pre-exhaust of the isolation exercise allows the target muscle to be by far the limiting factor for the compound exercise that follows, and lets it be exposed to a few more effective reps than it otherwise would be if that compound was done fresh. After each 2-exercise superset, 4-factor rest is again taken until the next 2-exercise superset begins. If you’d like to be super precise in counting sets for your volume landmarks, we recommend counting pre-exhaust supersets as 1.5x as the equivalent of a straight set. This is because the compound exercise done in the second part of the set is only limited (highly) by the target pre-exhausted muscle, and this isn’t nearly as fatiguing, especially systemically, as it would be if it were done fresh.
The hamstrings have such small requirements for volume and are so easily targeted with various exercises, they usually don’t need pre-exhausts. But, for individuals who have trouble stimulating hamstrings with hip hinges, a set of lying or seated curls before a hip hinge set might be an idea to try.
Occlusion Sets
Occlusion training is myorep training with the limb occluded just above the muscle. This occlusion causes the local muscle and nerve to be far and away the limiting factors on recovery between sets, and thus allows you to focus in on a target muscle group that might have otherwise been difficult to reach with non-occluded movements. The big benefit is time saving, because rest between occluded sets is only long enough to get another 5 reps, and you can also use weights at the very low end of the growth range and even a bit lower (20-30% 1RM). The downside is that the local vasculature adapts very quickly to occlusion, so it might not be very effective for any more than a mesocycle or two in a row. Also, some muscles are much harder than others to occlude, or even impossible to occlude. If you’d like to be super precise in counting sets for your volume landmarks, we recommend counting occlusion sets each as the equivalent of 2/3 of a straight set, as they cause much less systemic fatigue due to the lower reps and weights used.
It’s difficult to occlude the hamstrings effectively and is usually unnecessary. You can give this a shot, of course, but we suggest that you don’t expect too much out of this.

QUAD SIZE TRAINING TIPS

Updated: Feb 15, 2021

Let's also review our key training volume landmarks and relate them to training the back: 

MV = Maintenance Volume:
Perhaps around 6 sets per week are needed to maintain quad size for experienced trainers. It might be a slightly higher volume if you’re very physically active on your feet, because the anabolic stimulus of lifting has to compete with the catabolic stimulus of low intensity physical activity. We recommend 2 weekly sessions for maintenance, so that’s 3 sets per session, but you can probably get away with one weekly quad session for 6 sets and still maintain in an isocaloric state, and can do up to 3 sessions at 2 sets each as well.

MEV = Minimum Effective Volume:
Most intermediate-advanced lifters need at least 8 sets of direct quad work per week to make gains, and for some, it’s even more than that. If you’re training twice a week, that’s about 4 sets per session. It’s about 2-3 sets per session for 3x training, 2 sets for 4x training, and 1-2 sets or so for 5x or 6x training.

MAV = Maximum Adaptive Volume:
The maximum adaptive volume of a single session of any trained muscle group is still speculative, but research suggests it’s probably no lower than 4 working sets per session and no higher than 12 working sets per session in most intermediates. When you design your program and progressions, having lots of sessions with much fewer than 4 working sets per muscle group per session for multiple weeks on end might not be very efficient, and you might benefit from combining a few of these lower volume sessions to get the same volume but in fewer weekly sessions. Also, not exceeding 12 sets per session per muscle group for more than a few weeks is probably a good idea.

MRV = Maximum Recoverable Volume:
The MRV depends highly on the number of sessions per week. With 2 sessions, the average intermediate MRV for quads might be around 18 sets per week. With three sessions, it’s closer to 22 sets per week. With 4 sessions, it’s around 26 sets, and with 5 or 6 weekly sessions, it might be as high as 30 sets per week in many cases.  Exercise selection has a huge effect on quad MRVs, whereby lots of squatting usually causes lower MRVs via added fatigue, but lots of leg extensions cause much less fatigue and thus can create much higher MRVs, with leg presses and hack squats being somewhere between the two. In addition, quad training, especially when composed of lots of squatting, can be much more systemically fatiguing than other muscle group training. This is to say the creation of a quad training program should not only pay attention to local recovery ability of the quads themselves, but should also pay special attention to their effect on systemic recovery.


EXERCISES
Feet Forward Smith Squat
Front Squat Cross Grip
Front Squat
Hack Squat
High Bar Squat
Leg Extension
Leg Press
Narrow Stance Squat
Belt Squat

VARIATION
Within a training session, we recommend including between 1 and 3 different quad exercises, but no more than that in most cases, as doing more than 3 quad movements in one session is likely just a needless burning of potential exercise variations you can save for later mesocycles. Within a single week (microcycle) of training, we recommend between 2 and 5 different quad exercises. For example, if you train quads 3x a week, you can do a heavy barbell squat on one day, a lighter barbell squat on the next day, and a leg press version on the last day for 2 total exercises in the week. On the other hand, if you train quad 6x per week, you might want to choose (though don’t have to choose) as many as 5 different exercises, with only one of them repeated in a heavier/lighter arrangement. Because you want to keep exercises variations fresh for when you need to change exercises (through injury or staleness, for example), you should use as few exercises per week (and thus, per mesocycle, as we recommend keeping the same exercises in every week of each meso) as you can to get the job done. If you can just do a few more sets of barbell squats and get a great workout, there’s no reason to switch to hack squats, for example. If you’re doing an exercise, there should be a reason for it.

Over multiple mesocycles of training, you should seek to include different foot stances in your presses (hacks, squats, leg presses) to target not only the quads themselves but the many other muscles in your legs that “quad training” targets, such as the adductors. In addition, you should also at least occasionally do some form of leg extension, as it might target portions of your quads that squats do not.

Lastly, how do you know when it’s time to switch out a given exercise from your rotation to another exercise in your list of effective choices? The decision is based on answering just a few questions about the exercise you’re currently using:

Are you still making gains in rep strength on the exercise?
Is the exercise causing any aches or pains that are connective tissue related? And are these getting worse with each week or several weeks?
Is there a phasic need for the exercise to change? In other words, is the exercise appropriate for the rep range you’re trying to use it for? Example: barbell squats for sets of 25 just tire out your lower back, but leg extensions for 25 pump up your quads as intended.
Are you getting a good mind-muscle connection on the exercise, or is it feeling stale and annoying to do?
If you are still hitting PRs on the exercise, it’s not causing any undue pains, you’re getting a good mind-muscle connection, and there’s no other need to change it, then don’t change it! If this means you keep an exercise around for up to a year or more, so be it! But if an exercise isn’t yielding any more PRs for a whole meso (especially on a muscle gain or maintenance phase), if it’s hurting you in the “bad” way, if it feels super stale, and/or if you have to dump it because it’s not appropriate to an upcoming rep range target, then you should replace it. Many times, the questions will fall on both sides, and then it’s up to you to make a wise choice considering all the 4 variables above.

RANGE OF MOTION
Let’s face facts. Training quads with a full range of motion SUCKS. It’s brutal, painful, and each rep seems to take forever. But if you want maximum growth, there’s no other way. This means that you should likely invest in Olympic Weightlifting shoes and control every rep ALL the way down. Squats done deep enough to get your butt to your calves, leg presses so deep that (with a tight lower back) your knees are just lateral to your chest, and so on. For some exercises like hack squats and leg presses, you’ll need to bring your stance in and down on the platform, and that WILL reduce how much weight you can do, but that’s just a part of the dance! Remember that stretch under load is an independent driver of hypertrophy, so when you’re wondering why the hell you’re going so deep on quad moves, just remind yourself that there’s something down there you’re after… and that something is the deep, painful tearing of quad tissue that literally causes muscle growth.

LOADING
In general, like all muscles, the muscles of the quads benefit from weights in the 30%-85% 1RM range, which in many people roughly translates to a weight that results in between 5 and 30 reps on a first set taken to failure. We can split this range into heavy (5-10,) moderate (10-20), and light (20-30) categories, as there are tradeoffs to make between all of them.

The first point on loading is that the quads, like most muscles, seem to benefit from some training in all three of the rep ranges listed above. Because the moderate (10-20 rep) range often offers the best tradeoff between stimulus, fatigue, injury risk, and slow/fast fiber specificity, and mind-muscle connection, an argument can be made that a first-time program design could have most weekly working sets for the quad in this range, perhaps up to about 50% of them. The other 50% can perhaps be split evenly between the heavy (5-10) and light (20-30) rep ranges, as loading range diversity has been shown to be a potential benefit in its own right. That being said, many people will experience about the same balance of stimulus to fatigue in all three of the main rep ranges for quad training.

Quad exercises that rely on active postural support are not conducive to best training in the 20-30 or even in the high end of the 10-20 range. Squats and hack squats are best saved for the 5-15 rep ranges for this reason. On the other hand, doing leg extensions with loads heavy enough to produce sets of 5-10 reps is often needlessly stressful to the knees, and such isolation moves are probably best done in the 10-20 and even 20-30 ranges. Generally, the more compound the movement, the more it’s ideal for lower reps, and the more isolation, the better it is for higher reps. Squats should probably be done the heaviest, then hack squats and smith machine squats, then leg presses (which have the widest range of safe and effective loads), and finally leg extensions.

When constructing a weekly training plan, it’s probably a good idea to train the heavy ranges before the lighter ranges. Because both types of training cause fatigue, they all interfere with each other to some extent. However, the muscle and connective tissue damage from heavier training is likely more substantial and presents a higher risk of injury if some damage already exists from earlier training. Thus, if you do sets of 5-10 on Monday and (nearly always) sustain some form of micro-tearing, sets of 10-20 on Wednesday are lower in absolute force magnitude and are unlikely to cause the micro-tearing to expand into a notable injury. On the other hand, if you’re pre-damaged from lots of sets of 10-20 on Monday, going even heavier in such a state on Wednesday in the 5-10 range is a bit more likely to result in injury. Thus, a potential sequencing of heavy-moderate-light during the week might be advisable, with a day or two of extra rest after the light session and before the next heavy session to make sure most damage has been healed and another productive week can begin.

A sample arrangement of exercises, sets, and loads can look something like this:

Monday:

Squats 3 sets, 5-10 reps
Hack Squats 3 sets, 5-10 reps
Wednesday:

Hack Squats 3 sets, 10-20 reps
Leg Presses 3 sets, 10-20 reps
Friday:

Leg Extensions 3 sets, 20-30 reps
Leg Presses 3 sets, 20-30 reps
Based on your personal responses to each of the main rep ranges, you can adjust how much volume you perform in any of them. For example, if you notice that you get a better stimulus (pumps, soreness, mind-muscle connection, etc.) and lower fatigue (joint stress, systemic fatigue, joint soreness, etc.) in some of the ranges vs. others, you can do more sets in those ranges and a bit less in others, though you should in most cases still include at least some work in the least productive ranges. For example, you might find that neither 5-10 nor 20-30 rep ranges work very well for your quad training, so you might only do a few sets of both in most weeks and do the vast majority of your sets in the 10-20 range.

REST TIMES
When determining how long to rest between any two sets in training, our goal is for enough rest to be taken such that the next set is at least close to maximally productive. How can we ensure this? By answering 4 basic questions about our recovery status:

Has the target muscle locally recovered to do at least 5 reps on the next set?
Has the nervous system recovered enough to remove it as a limiting factor to target muscle performance?
Has the cardiorespiratory system recovered enough to remove it as a limiting factor to target muscle performance?
Have synergist muscles in the exercise being performed recovered enough to remove them as a limiting factors to target muscle performance?
 

It might take only 1-2 minutes to recover very well (let’s say, 90%) on all of those factors, but because set to set recovery is asymptotic in nature, it might take another 3 minutes to get to 95% recovery and another 10 minutes more to get to 99% recovery. Since you only have so much time to spend in the gym, 10 “90% recovered sets” in 45 minutes of training is a much more anabolic stimulus than only 3 “99% recovered” sets in that same amount of time. Thus, our recommendation is to make sure you can clearly check all 4 boxes of recovery above, but to not wait much longer than what can be considered “very good” recovery in the incredibly inefficient quest for “near perfect recovery.”

 

Here’s an example of what can be considered “very good” recovery between sets of quad training. Before you do another set of squats, ask yourself:

 

Are my quads still burning from the last set, or do they feel ok again?
Do I feel like I can push hard with my quads again, and I am mentally ready for another hard set, or do I need more time to rest?
Is my breathing more or less back to normal, or is it still very heavy?
Are my glutes and lower back still very fatigued, or are they ready to support my quads in the upcoming set of squats?
 

If you can get the green light on all of these, you’re probably ready to do another set, and waiting much longer will almost certainly not be of benefit.

You’ll notice that depending on the exercise and on the lifter, very different rest times will be generated by this questionnaire. For example, seated leg extensions might not even have synergist muscles, so question 4 doesn’t even apply and rest times can be less than 30 seconds, whereas barbell squats might need 3 minutes between sets just to regain normal breathing. And if you’re on the larger and stronger side of things, and your cardio isn’t great, you’ll be resting much longer than someone smaller, not as strong, and in excellent cardio shape. While average rest times between sets of quads training will be between 30 seconds and 3 minutes, the most important consideration is to take the rest time you need, and not copy someone else’s, rush the process, or sit around needlessly for minutes after all 4 factors are good to go for your next set to commence. 

FREQUENCY
There are two main considerations for determining training frequency. The first is the duration of the increase in muscle growth seen after a bout of training between MEV and MRV. If such an increase in muscle growth lasts 7 days, then perhaps a once a week frequency is optimal. If such an increase lasts only a day, then perhaps 6 days a week for the same muscle group is much better. While direct research on muscle growth timecourses is very limited, it seems that typical training might cause a reliable 24-48 hour increase in muscle growth. This would mean that if muscle growth elevation was the only variable of concern with regards to frequency, we should train every muscle 3-6 times per week.

However, the second main consideration on determining training frequency is recovery. A single bout of training between MEV and MRV causes muscle growth to occur, but it also presents some degree of fatigue. If we are to progress in training and allow adaptations to fully take hold over days and weeks, we must allow enough time to elapse between overloading sessions for at least most fatigue to dissipate. On average, the exact amount of fatigue dissipation must be at least enough to allow performance to return to baseline or higher, such than an overload can be presented. In other words, if you can normally leg press 405 for 15 reps, asking yourself “when should my next quad workout be after this last one” can be answered by “when will you be recovered enough to be able to leg press at least 405 for 15 reps?” The timecourse of fatigue is usually a bit longer than that of muscle growth, unfortunately, so that for most people, recovery, not muscle growth cessation, will be the limiting factor on frequency. In most per-session MEV-MRV training volumes, fatigue will take between 1-2 days to come back down enough to restore or improve on past performance, and that highly depends on the muscle in question and even the exercises used.

How do you determine what training frequency is appropriate for you? You can start by training your quads at per-session MEV volumes. After each session, you note when soreness has abated and when you feel recovered enough psychologically to attempt another overloading workout. When you’re ready, and no later, go back to the gym and train quads again, with volumes just a bit higher than MEV (using the RP Set Progression Algorithm). If you’re recovering on time, keep coming back and training your quads as often as you have been. If you notice that you need more time to recover, add a day to your next post-quad-training window. If you’re recovering faster than you thought you could, train a bit more often. After a mesocycle of such adjustments, you will have a rough but very good guess as to what your average quad training frequency can be for most of your programs going forward. In fact, your frequency will not only be tailored exactly to your responses, but you’ll be pretty sure it’s close to optimal because it was literally derived from how fast you can recover; which is the very primary variable that determines frequency.

Just so that you have some expectation of where to start, most individuals can recover from quad training at a timecourse that allows for 2-5 sessions of quads per week at MEV-MRV volumes. However, only through direct experimentation on yourself can you tell where in this range is best for you and if maybe you’re even outside of this range. Just remember that so long as you’re recovered to train again (can perform at or above normal levels), training is a better idea than waiting to train, because higher frequency programs, at least in the short term, have shown to generate more muscle growth than needlessly lower ones.

To improve your training frequency, you can alternate exercise selections between successive quad workouts. For example, if you do leg presses on one day, you might do squats or hack squats the next day, and so on. This rotation of slightly different exercises and movement patterns can take repeated stress off of very small and specific parts of your muscles and connective tissues, which might reduce chronic injury risk exposure.

Please note that when you’re determining your quad training frequency, you’ll have to juggle it a bit with your glute training frequency, as unrecovered quads can impede your glute training, and even glute training itself can tax your quads enough to require a frequency reduction for direct quad training.



PERIODIZATION
There are a few relevant timescales in periodization:

The repetition (1-9 seconds)
The set (5-30 repetitions)
The exercise (1-5 sets)
The session (2-6 exercises)
The day (0-2 sessions)
The microcycle (usually 1 week of training)
The mesocycle (3-12 weeks)
The block (1-4 mesoscycles)
The macrocycle (1-4 blocks)
We’ve already covered the most important details on most of these timescales, so in this section, we’ll focus on a brief understanding of how to manipulate training over a typical mesocycle and training block.

A mesocycle is composed of two phases: the accumulation phase and the deload phase. The accumulation phase lasts as long as it takes to hit systemic MRV, which, because fatigue accumulates in MEV+ training, has to happen at some point. For beginners with very high recovery abilities, it can take up to 12 weeks of increasingly more demanding training for systemic MRV to be reached and a deload to be required. For very advanced lifters that have very strong, large, and volume-resistant muscles, it can take only 3-4 weeks of accumulation training to reach systemic MRV and need to deload. The deload phase is designed to bring down the fatigue from the accumulation phase, and it usually only lasts a week or so (one microcycle).

When you begin a mesocycle of training, you should probably begin at or close to your MEV for all the muscle groups you’d like to improve during that mesocycle, for reasons described extensively in our book on the subject of training volume. Week to week, you can manipulate working sets by using the Set Progression algorithm from the Training Volume Landmarks for Muscle Growth (link) article. You should seek to keep reps stable from week to week while letting your RIR decline from a 3 or 4 RIR start until it gets down to 0 (for exercises that don’t threaten the bar falling on you) or 1 (for those that do) in the last week of training. The way you keep the reps stable as RIR falls is by adding weight to the exercises you’re using. How much weight to add is a matter of an educated guess on your part. You want to add enough weight to get your target RIR with the same reps as last week. For example, if you did 100lbs last week for 10 reps on your first set of an exercise at 2 RIR, how much should you do next week to get 10 reps again but at 1 RIR? Well, you might think that adding 2.5lbs would be too easy, and you could honestly get 11 reps with that next week at 1 RIR, but adding 10lbs might require you to push to 0 RIR to get 10 reps, so you would just add 5lbs and that will probably take you where you need to be. If you’re making very rapid gains on an exercise, you might have a few weeks here and there where even though you increased weight by a bit, your RIR didn’t decline. You might have hit 8 reps at 100lbs at 3 RIR last week, and then hit 8 reps again at 3 RIR with 105lbs this week! This is a good thing, and lots of these weeks are how beginners can sometimes crank out up to 12 weeks of accumulation. Since getting to failure too soon is MUCH WORSE than getting there a bit slower, we recommend being conservative on nearly all weekly weight additions.

If you can’t realistically add weight, you can add reps. This might happen when, for example, you are using the 25lb dumbbells one week and then having to do the 30lbers next week, wildly slashing your reps. Just remember to stay within your general rep range and not leave it in any given meso. If you start at sets of about 5 reps, don’t add any more reps than will give you sets of 10, because that will take you out of the 5-10 range and no longer fulfil the needs of your training program in the way it was intended. If you start to exit a range by adding reps, add weight to take yourself back into that range, even if the increments are big and take you all the way down to the bottom of the range. Yes, this might mean that last week you were doing 20 reps with the 20lb dumbbells on your first set, and this week you’re back to only 10 reps with the 25lbers at the same or one less RIR, but that’s proper training!

Once you cannot tie previous reps in at least two consecutive sessions for a given muscle group, you have likely hit its local MRV, and need to reduce its training volume. Our recommendation is to take the next planned session with half of the planned working sets, half of the planned reps, and half of the load for recovery. In the session after, resume your load progression from before, but start at a number of sets halfway between where you started the meso and your MRV set number, and an RIR of around 2. Thus, for example, if you hit 100lbs for 10 reps on a first set last session (6 total sets in the session for that muscle group), whereas the week before, you hit 95lbs for 12 reps, your next workout can be 50lbs for 3 sets of about 5 reps. Then, next week, you resume with 105lbs, but shoot for 2 RIR and do 4 sets total, because you started the meso at 2 sets, and 4 is halfway between 2 and 6 sets. Continue to train normally after that until and unless you hit MRV again.

Systemic MRV is when you’re training so hard that your sleep quality declines, your appetite falls, and you might get sick more often. It’s also when nearly all of your muscles start to hit local MRVs at about the same time. Once that happens (and be honest with yourself when it does), stop the accumulation phase and begin the deload phase.

The deload can be done many ways, but our recommendation is to take sets to MEV for the whole week. The load should be week 1’s load for the first half of the week and ½ of week 1’s load for the second half. The reps should be roughly half of all week 1’s reps for all sets during the deload week. This makes the deload VERY EASY, which is the whole point, since hard training doesn’t bring down fatigue! You should feel refreshed and be craving hard training toward the end of your deload week if you’re setting it up correctly.

Those are the basics of periodization over the mesoscycle. The training block is a sequence of mesoscycles strung together for one unifying purpose. For example, a muscle gain block may be 3 mesocycles of 6 weeks each, one after another, with weight gain the goal for all 18 of those total weeks, or a fat loss block might be 2 mesocycles of 5 weeks long during which weight loss is the goal for all 10 of those weeks.

Though we can potentially alter all training variables over a training block, frequency, exercise selection, and loading are definitely noteworthy.

Frequency:

When you start a training block, your MEVs are very low and so are your weekly MRVs. Thus, you can fit your total training volume relatively easily into lower frequencies, such as 2x per week per muscle group, for example. As training progresses and you start your next meso, not only do your per-session MEVs go up, but your weekly MRVs go up as well, making fitting all your training into just a few sessions more difficult. As well, you’re now quite used to the exercises, and recovery between sessions occurs much faster, allowing a higher frequency microcycle to be much more realistic. At this point, you can increase your frequency a bit, perhaps to an average of something like 3x per muscle group, for example. In the last one or two mesos, your per-session MEVs are very high and your per-week MRVs even higher. To really get the best gains, another bump in frequency is recommended, and you might go to 4x or so training per muscle group, and perhaps even higher.

Unfortunately, super high frequencies might not be the most sustainable for a couple of reasons. First, muscles heal faster than connective tissues, and if you train with very high frequencies, sometimes your connective tissue recovery can lag behind your muscle recovery, which may set you up for injuries if unabated. Secondly, the sheer weekly volume that higher frequencies let you do productively might cause so much fatigue escalation as to not be sustainable for longer than a mesocycle or two. Thus, after training for a meso or two at your highest frequency, you might end the training block and seek to reduce the very high fatigue levels you have accumulated, in part by starting whatever phase you start next at lower frequencies.

Exercise Selection:

For normal exercise selection decisions, you can just follow the 4-part exercise deletion and replacement guidelines in the variation section above. But as you add sessions from meso to meso with a climbing frequency, you’ll need to consider adding exercises. Yes, you can repeat exercises a few times in the week with different loads, but we recommend doing this sparingly, and more often adding in new exercises when you add new sessions as frequency climbs. Thus, you might start with an exercise on Monday and a different one on Thursday in a 2x meso, but when you move to 3x, you might have to add a new exercise on Friday, keeping the Monday exercise the same and moving the Thursday exercise to Wednesday. Because fatigue and wear and tear increase with each meso in a block, we recommend adding less systemically disruptive exercises more often than adding more disruptive ones. For example, you might consider adding some leg extensions on that Friday 3x session but adding barbell squats to an already fatiguing week of quad training might be overkill. Yes, you can add very tough movements as you go, but we recommend against it in most cases. Thus, you start with pretty much only or mostly basic, high-stress moves such as barbell squats and hack squats earlier in the block, and later on add leg presses, leg extensions, and other such less fatiguing exercises as you add in sessions to expand frequency over the training block.

Loading:

Whatever exercises you’ve carried over from one meso to the next should be done in the same rep ranges as they were done in the last mesos. For example, if you did barbell squats in the 5-10 rep range on a first set in the last meso, in the next meso, you should continue your loading progression to stay in that same rep range, which often means just adding small increments of weight from where you last left off in the last meso, or lightening up the weight just enough to get similar reps at 3-4 RIR again in the first week. But for new exercises added in each meso as frequency goes up, we recommend adding in the moderate (10-20) and light (20-30) rep ranges instead of the heavy (5-10) range. This recommendation occurs for two reasons. First, as you take on more wear and tear and fatigue, adding more 5-10 rep movements might cause a large increase in injury risk, especially now that you’re asking your body to perform with such heavy loads with even less recovery time between sessions. Secondly, very high rep (20-30) training seems to cause robust gains over a meso or two, but in part because your body adapts to buffering metabolites so quickly, might not work nearly as well for much longer. Thus, you may want to start with heavier training in the first meso of a block, keep it for all remaining mesos, and add in lighter training with new sessions as you go, which also pairs well with the selection of less fatiguing exercises. Here’s an example of how that might look for the quads:

Meso 1:

Monday Barbell Squats (5-10)
Thursday Hack Squats (10-20)
Meso 2:

Monday Barbell Squats (5-10)
Wednesday Hack Squats (10-20)
Friday Leg Presses (10-20)
Meso 3:

Monday Barbell Squats (5-10)
Wednesday Hack Squats (10-20)
Friday Leg Presses (10-20)
Saturday Leg Extensions (20-30)
Once you’ve done a whole training block, you can do a mesocycle of low frequency (2x) training at MV with mostly 5-10 rep ranges and compound movements to resensitize your muscles to volume and growth again. This meso can take about a month and can be good to pair with maintenance eating to bring down any diet fatigue you might have from hard dieting in the last block. If you don’t have any real diet fatigue, you can instead take around 2 weeks of active rest (sometimes just one week if you count the deload after your last meso), where you train with 1x frequency for every muscle, with only about 2 working sets per muscle per session, and with weights that are around 50% of your 5-10 range, but doing them for only 5-10 reps per set. This ultra-easy training can make you ready for another whole block of training in the gym and can even be replaced with no training at all if you’re feeling really beat up or tired. Once you’ve taken this easy time, you’re probably ready to give another training block a go!

TRAINING MODALITIES
Straight Sets
Straight sets are sets performed to 0-4 RIR, with enough rest time to recover all 4 limiting factors (see the rest time section above for details).
Many of the best quad exercises are compound, technical, heavy and very fatiguing, so are perfectly suited for straight sets.
Down Sets
Down sets are straight sets, but with less weight (usually 10-20% less) than the previous straight sets. By lowering the weight, you can keep reps over 5 per set, and/or keep the mind-muscle connection high and keep technique excellent to continue to have a high stimulus to fatigue ratio in every set of that exercise.  
An excellent choice, especially when squat, leg press, and hack squat reps drop below 5-10 and mind-muscle connection problems really surface.
Controlled Eccentrics and Pauses
Concentric, eccentric, and isometric phases of each exercise can be between half a second and 3 seconds long and still confer near-optimal effects on hypertrophy. In some cases, slowing down eccentrics and extending pauses can enhance technique, mind-muscle connection, and safety of the exercise.
You don’t have to pause on squats and leg presses, but for the bigger and stronger, there are nearly no downsides and very good upsides both from injury prevention and technique maintenance. If you have to pause, you’re more likely to control the descent and end up in a good position for the ascent, making your technique better. Slow eccentrics can be used for variation or to nail technique and mind-muscle connection problems in quad moves.
Giant Sets 
Giant sets give you a certain weight to lift, an RIR range to hit (usually 0-4 RIR), and a goal of total reps over as many sets as it takes. An example is aiming to do 100lbs for however many sets it takes to get 60 total reps, while taking normal rest between each set. Such an approach can take the focus off of having to match or exceed the per-set reps you did last week, and can thus let you super-focus on technique and the mind-muscle connection, thus potentially improving both and getting more out of the training with exercises than can demand lots of technique and mind-muscle connection to be effective. If you’d like to be super precise in counting sets for your volume landmarks, we recommend counting giant sets at 2/3 of the contribution of straight sets, such that if you did 6 total sets to get to your giant set rep target, you can count that as 4 sets of “straight set equivalency” in terms of stimulus and fatigue. This discount is because with a higher focus on technique and mind-muscle connection and a lower focus on getting as many reps per set as possible, giant sets likely don’t cause as much fatigue as straight sets.
These can be excellent for teaching newer folks technique while meeting volume needs, but have limited applications to more experienced lifters.
Myoreps
Myoreps are just like straight sets in that they must check all 4 recovery boxes before doing another set. However, they are different in two ways. First, while the first set is usually between 10-20 reps (0-2 RIR), the next multiple sets only rest long enough to get between 5 and 10 reps each. This is to maximize the ratio of effective (near-failure) reps to total reps over the multiple sets. Secondly, for all of those successive sets to register the highest number of effective reps per set, the local recovery factor (the muscle and its motor nerve) must be by far the most limiting, so that successive sets are not limited by the CNS, the lungs, and other muscles and thus the final reps of each set really do recruit and tense the fastest and most growth-prone motor units. For this to be possible, only isolation exercises without limiting synergists are appropriate for myoreps. If you’d like to be super precise in counting sets for your volume landmarks, we recommend counting myorep sets each as the equivalent of a straight set. While they do have fewer reps, they are often taken closer to failure and thus turn out to be about as fatiguing.
These can be done on leg extensions and with limited application on leg presses, but are not compatible with most quad training, as it’s very systemically and synergistically demanding.
Drop Sets
Drop sets are exactly like myoreps, but with even shorter rest times because weight is reduced by 10-20% on average between each set. The effects are very similar. The advantage of drop sets is their time saving, and their slight disadvantage over myoreps is that dropping the weight a lot can reduce mind-muscle connection via reducing tension perception. If you’d like to be super precise in counting sets for your volume landmarks, we recommend counting drop sets each as the equivalent of a straight set. While they do have fewer reps and lighter loads, they are often taken closer to failure and in such rapid and painful succession that they turn out to be about as fatiguing.
Can be done with leg extensions, but unless you hate your training partners, can’t really be done on leg presses or hack squats, and free squats are too cardiorespiratorily limiting for drop sets to work.
Pre-Exhaust Supersets
These supersets begin with an isolation exercise for a given muscle group, and with no rest after taking it to 0-2 RIR, end with a compound exercise to which the target muscle is a big contributor. The local pre-exhaust of the isolation exercise allows the target muscle to be by far the limiting factor for the compound exercise that follows, and lets it be exposed to a few more effective reps than it otherwise would be if that compound was done fresh. After each 2-exercise superset, 4-factor rest is again taken until the next 2-exercise superset begins. If you’d like to be super precise in counting sets for your volume landmarks, we recommend counting pre-exhaust supersets as 1.5x as the equivalent of a straight set. This is because the compound exercise done in the second part of the set is only limited (highly) by the target pre-exhausted muscle, and this isn’t nearly as fatiguing, especially systemically, as it would be if it were done fresh.
Can be done with leg extensions and any other compound quad move after, but leg presses are too systemically fatiguing to be followed by squats or hacks for a pre-exhaust effect. However, exercise order can give a sort of pre-exhaust effect by allowing you to make the quads the limiting factor in compound moves by doing more isolated moves before starting the compound exercise. For example, doing all of your leg press sets before doing any squats can allow the squats to be more limited by your quads and thus tax them more than other muscles, while reducing systemic, axial, and synergist fatigue.
Occlusion Sets
Occlusion training is myorep training with the limb occluded just above the muscle. This occlusion causes the local muscle and nerve to be far and away the limiting factors on recovery between sets, and thus allows you to focus in on a target muscle group that might have otherwise been difficult to reach with non-occluded movements. The big benefit is time saving, because rest between occluded sets is only long enough to get another 5 reps, and you can also use weights at the very low end of the growth range and even a bit lower (20-30% 1RM). The downside is that the local vasculature adapts very quickly to occlusion, so it might not be very effective for any more than a mesocycle or two in a row. Also, some muscles are much harder than others to occlude, or even impossible to occlude. If you’d like to be super precise in counting sets for your volume landmarks, we recommend counting occlusion sets each as the equivalent of 2/3 of a straight set, as they cause much less systemic fatigue due to the lower reps and weights used.
Can be done on all quad moves, but are often just no necessary, since the quads can be so easily training anyway. Definitely something to try for variation, especially on leg extensions and presses

REAR DELT SIZE TRAINING TIPS

Updated: Feb 13, 2021

Let's also review our key training volume landmarks and relate them to training the back: 


MV = Maintenance Volume:
The rear delts can be sustained with no direct work so long as pulling work for the back is still done.

MEV = Minimum Effective Volume:
Most intermediate-advanced lifters need at least 6 sets of direct rear delt work per week to make gains. The rear delts recover very quickly, and training them once a week is unlikely to lead to consistent gains past the beginner stage. At least 2 weekly sessions are recommended (3 sets each to hit MEV for the well-trained), and 3-5 weekly sessions are probably going to result in much better gains for this quickly recovering muscle group.

MAV = Maximum Adaptive Volume:
The maximum adaptive volume of a single session of any trained muscle group is still speculative, but research suggests it’s probably no lower than 4 working sets per session and no higher than 12 working sets per session in most intermediates. When you design your program and progressions, having lots of sessions with much fewer than 4 working sets per muscle group per session for multiple weeks on end might not be very efficient, and you might benefit from combining a few of these lower volume sessions to get the same volume but in fewer weekly sessions. Also, not exceeding 12 sets per session per muscle group for more than a few weeks is probably a good idea.

MRV = Maximum Recoverable Volume:
The MRV depends highly on the number of sessions per week. With 2 sessions, the average intermediate MRV for rear delts might be around 18 sets per week. With three sessions, it’s closer to 25 sets per week. With 4 sessions, it’s around 30 sets, and with 5 or 6 weekly sessions, it might be as high as 35 sets per week in many cases. 


EXERCISES
Bent Lateral Raise
Cable Cross Body Bent Lateral Raise
Cable Rope Facepull
Cable Single Arm Rear Delt Raise
Dumbbell Facepull
Incline Dumbbell Facepull
Incline Dumbbell Lateral Raise
Kneeling Cable Facepull
Machine Reverse Flye
Barbell Facepull

VARIATION
Within a training session, we recommend including between 1 and 2 different rear delt exercises, but no more than that in most cases, as doing more than 2 rear delt movements in one session is likely just a needless burning of potential exercise variations you can save for later days (since rear delt frequency is often high) and mesocycles. Within a single week (microcycle) of training, we recommend between 2 and 5 different rear delt exercises. For example, if you train rear delts 3x a week, you can do a heavy barbell face pull on one day, a lighter barbell face pull on the next day, and a rear lateral version on the last day for 2 total exercises in the week. On the other hand, if you train rear delts 6x per week, you might want to choose (though don’t have to choose) as many as 5 different exercises, with only one of them repeated in a heavier/lighter arrangement. Because you want to keep exercises variations fresh for when you need to change exercises (through injury or staleness, for example), you should use as few exercises per week (and thus, per mesocycle, as we recommend keeping the same exercises in every week of each meso) as you can to get the job done. If you can just do a few more sets of barbell face pulls and get a great workout, there’s no reason to switch to dumbbell face pulls, for example. If you’re doing an exercise, there should be a reason for it.

 Lastly, how do you know when it’s time to switch out a given exercise from your rotation to another exercise in your list of effective choices? The decision is based on answering just a few questions about the exercise you’re currently using:

Are you still making gains in rep strength on the exercise?
Is the exercise causing any aches or pains that are connective tissue related? And are these getting worse with each week or several weeks?
Is there a phasic need for the exercise to change? In other words, is the exercise appropriate for the rep range you’re trying to use it for? Example: doing dumbbell rear laterals for sets of 5-10 is a mind-muscle connection nightmare, but doing cable face pulls for those reps can be an effective stimulus.
Are you getting a good mind-muscle connection on the exercise, or is it feeling stale and annoying to do?
 If you are still hitting PRs on the exercise, it’s not causing any undue pains, you’re getting a good mind-muscle connection, and there’s no other need to change it, then don’t change it! If this means you keep an exercise around for up to a year or more, so be it! But if an exercise isn’t yielding any more PRs for a whole meso (especially on a muscle gain or maintenance phase), if it’s hurting you in the “bad” way, if it feels super stale, and/or if you have to dump it because it’s not appropriate to an upcoming rep range target, then you should replace it. Many times, the questions will fall on both sides, and then it’s up to you to make a wise choice considering all the 4 variables above.

RANGE OF MOTION
Full ROM is important for rear delt development, but make sure you’re not doing anything that hurts your shoulder joint. Because on many exercises (like free weight bent laterals), there is little tension at the bottom of the lift, it’s probably ok to not go all the way down as a matter of principle, but pausing at the top can promote excellent mind-muscle connection, which is important because so many other muscles (such as the back muscles) can take over for the rear delts if you just move the weight around with little attention to the rear delts themselves.

LOADING
In general, like all muscles, the rear delts benefit from weights in the 30%-85% 1RM range, which in many people roughly translates to a weight that results in between 5 and 30 reps on a first set taken to failure. We can split this range into heavy (5-10,) moderate (10-20), and light (20-30) categories, as there are tradeoffs to make between all of them.

The first point on loading is that the rear delts, like most muscles, seem to benefit from some training in all three of the rep ranges listed above. Because the moderate (10-20 rep) range often offers the best tradeoff between stimulus, fatigue, injury risk, and slow/fast fiber specificity, and mind-muscle connection, an argument can be made that a first-time program design could have most weekly working sets for the rear delts in this range, perhaps up to about 50% of them. The other 50% can perhaps be split evenly between the heavy (5-10) and light (20-30) rep ranges, as loading range diversity has been shown to be a potential benefit in its own right.

We must note that very few people seem to respond very well to rear delt training in the 5-10 rep range, so while such a range should be experimented with early on in rear delt training and if/when a plateau in gains presents itself, it’s perhaps not mandated for inclusion in most people’s training most of the time. Additionally, rear delt training in the 20-30 range seems very productive for most lifters, even perhaps as productive as rear delt training in the 10-20 range. One reason this is the case is that heavy back training probably already supplies the rear delts with enough of the heaviest loading, and that the tough-to-reach rear delts probably benefit the most from a high degree of mind-muscle connection, which is usually ruled out in the 5-10 range.

When constructing a weekly training plan, it’s probably a good idea to train the heavy ranges before the lighter ranges. Because both types of training cause fatigue, they all interfere with each other to some extent. However, the muscle and connective tissue damage from heavier training is likely more substantial and presents a higher risk of injury if some damage already exists from earlier training. Thus, if you do sets of 5-10 on Monday and (nearly always) sustain some form of micro-tearing, sets of 10-20 on Wednesday are lower in absolute force magnitude and are unlikely to cause the micro-tearing to expand into a notable injury. On the other hand, if you’re pre-damaged from lots of sets of 10-20 on Monday, going even heavier in such a state on Wednesday in the 5-10 range is a bit more likely to result in injury. Thus, a potential sequencing of heavy-moderate-light during the week might be advisable, with a day or two of extra rest after the light session and before the next heavy session to make sure most damage has been healed and another productive week can begin.

A sample arrangement of exercises, sets, and loads can look something like this:

Monday:

Barbell Face Pulls 3 sets 5-10 reps
Machine Rear Delts 3 sets 10-20 reps
Wednesday:

Dummbell Rear Lateral Raise 4 sets, 10-20 reps
Dumbbell Face Pulls 4 sets, 10-20 reps
Friday:

Machine Rear Delts 4 sets, 20-30 reps
Cable Face Pulls 4 sets, 20-30 reps
Based on your personal responses to each of the main rep ranges, you can adjust how much volume you perform in any of them. For example, if you notice that you get a better stimulus (pumps, soreness, mind-muscle connection, etc.) and lower fatigue (joint stress, systemic fatigue, joint soreness, etc.) in some of the ranges vs. others, you can do more sets in those ranges and a bit less in others, though you should in most cases still include at least some work in the least productive ranges. For example, you might find that neither 5-10 nor 10-20 rep ranges work very well for your rear delt training, so you might only do a few sets of both in most weeks and do the vast majority of your sets in the 20-30 range. We must note that many people get a very poor mind-muscle connection in the rear delts in the 5-10 rep range. Because you get a lot of high force rear delt stimulus from back training, you may opt out of 5-10 rep range training for the rear delts entirely, probably with little or no detriment.

REST TIMES
When determining how long to rest between any two sets in training, our goal is for enough rest to be taken such that the next set is at least close to maximally productive. How can we ensure this? By answering 4 basic questions about our recovery status:

Has the target muscle locally recovered to do at least 5 reps on the next set?
Has the nervous system recovered enough to remove it as a limiting factor to target muscle performance?
Has the cardiorespiratory system recovered enough to remove it as a limiting factor to target muscle performance?
Have synergist muscles in the exercise being performed recovered enough to remove them as a limiting factors to target muscle performance?
It might take only 1-2 minutes to recover very well (let’s say, 90%) on all of those factors, but because set to set recovery is asymptotic in nature, it might take another 3 minutes to get to 95% recovery and another 10 minutes more to get to 99% recovery. Since you only have so much time to spend in the gym, 10 “90% recovered sets” in 45 minutes of training is a much more anabolic stimulus than only 3 “99% recovered” sets in that same amount of time. Thus, our recommendation is to make sure you can clearly check all 4 boxes of recovery above, but to not wait much longer than what can be considered “very good” recovery in the incredibly inefficient quest for “near perfect recovery.”

 Here’s an example of what can be considered “very good” recovery between sets of rear delt training. Before you do another set of barbell face pulls, ask yourself:

Are my rear delts still burning from the last set, or do they feel ok again?
Do I feel like I can pull hard with my rear delts again, and I am mentally ready for another hard set, or do I need more time to rest?
Is my breathing more or less back to normal, or is it still very heavy?
Are my forearms and biceps still very fatigued, or are they ready to support my rear delts in the upcoming set of barbell face pulls?
 If you can get the green light on all of these, you’re probably ready to do another set, and waiting much longer will almost certainly not be of benefit.

 You’ll notice that depending on the exercise and on the lifter, very different rest times will be generated by this questionnaire. For example, seated machine rear laterals might not even have synergist muscles, so question 4 doesn’t even apply and rest times can be less than 15 seconds, whereas barbell face pulls might need 2 minutes between sets just to regain normal breathing. And if you’re on the larger and stronger side of things, and your cardio isn’t great, you’ll be resting much longer than someone smaller, not as strong, and in excellent cardio shape. While average rest times between sets of hamstrings training will be between 15 seconds and 2 minutes, the most important consideration is to take the rest time you need, and not copy someone else’s, rush the process, or sit around needlessly for minutes after all 4 factors are good to go for your next set to commence. 

FREQUENCY
There are two main considerations for determining training frequency. The first is the duration of the increase in muscle growth seen after a bout of training between MEV and MRV. If such an increase in muscle growth lasts 7 days, then perhaps a once a week frequency is optimal. If such an increase lasts only a day, then perhaps 6 days a week for the same muscle group is much better. While direct research on muscle growth timecourses is very limited, it seems that typical training might cause a reliable 24-48 hour increase in muscle growth. This would mean that if muscle growth elevation was the only variable of concern with regards to frequency, we should train every muscle 3-6 times per week.

However, the second main consideration on determining training frequency is recovery. A single bout of training between MEV and MRV causes muscle growth to occur, but it also presents some degree of fatigue. If we are to progress in training and allow adaptations to fully take hold over days and weeks, we must allow enough time to elapse between overloading sessions for at least most fatigue to dissipate. On average, the exact amount of fatigue dissipation must be at least enough to allow performance to return to baseline or higher, such than an overload can be presented. In other words, if you can normally barbell face pull 55 for 15 reps, asking yourself “when should my next rear delt workout be after this last one” can be answered by “when will you be recovered enough to be able to face pull at least 55 for 15 reps?” The timecourse of fatigue is usually a bit longer than that of muscle growth, unfortunately, so that for most people, recovery, not muscle growth cessation, will be the limiting factor on frequency. In most per-session MEV-MRV training volumes, fatigue will take between 1-2 days to come back down enough to restore or improve on past performance, and that highly depends on the muscle in question and even the exercises used.

How do you determine what training frequency is appropriate for you? You can start by training your rear delts at per-session MEV volumes. After each session, you note when soreness has abated and when you feel recovered enough psychologically to attempt another overloading workout. When you’re ready, and no later, go back to the gym and train rear delts again, with volumes just a bit higher than MEV (using the RP Set Progression Algorithm). If you’re recovering on time, keep coming back and training your rear delts as often as you have been. If you notice that you need more time to recover, add a day to your next post-rear delt-training window. If you’re recovering faster than you thought you could, train a bit more often. After a mesocycle of such adjustments, you will have a rough but very good guess as to what your average rear delt training frequency can be for most of your programs going forward. In fact, your frequency will not only be tailored exactly to your responses, but you’ll be pretty sure it’s close to optimal because it was literally derived from how fast you can recover; which is the very primary variable that determines frequency.

Just so that you have some expectation of where to start, most individuals can recover from rear delt training at a timecourse that allows for 3-6 sessions of rear delts per week at MEV-MRV volumes in the context of normal back training. However, only through direct experimentation on yourself can you tell where in this range is best for you and if maybe you’re even outside of this range. Just remember that so long as you’re recovered to train again (can perform at or above normal levels), training is a better idea than waiting to train, because higher frequency programs, at least in the short term, have shown to generate more muscle growth than needlessly lower ones.

To improve your training frequency, you can alternate exercise selections between successive rear delt workouts. For example, if you do barbell face pulls on one day, you might do dumbbell face pulls or machine rear laterals the next day, and so on. This rotation of slightly different exercises and movement patterns can take repeated stress off of very small and specific parts of your muscles and connective tissues, which might reduce chronic injury risk exposure.

Please note that when you’re determining your rear delt training frequency, you’ll have to juggle it a lot with your back training frequency, as unrecovered rear delts can impede your back training, and back training itself can tax your rear delts enough to require a frequency reduction for direct rear delt training.



PERIODIZATION
 There are a few relevant timescales in periodization:

The repetition (1-9 seconds)
The set (5-30 repetitions)
The exercise (1-5 sets)
The session (2-6 exercises)
The day (0-2 sessions)
The microcycle (usually 1 week of training)
The mesocycle (3-12 weeks)
The block (1-4 mesoscycles)
The macrocycle (1-4 blocks)
We’ve already covered the most important details on most of these timescales, so in this section, we’ll focus on a brief understanding of how to manipulate training over a typical mesocycle and training block.

A mesocycle is composed of two phases: the accumulation phase and the deload phase. The accumulation phase lasts as long as it takes to hit systemic MRV, which, because fatigue accumulates in MEV+ training, has to happen at some point. For beginners with very high recovery abilities, it can take up to 12 weeks of increasingly more demanding training for systemic MRV to be reached and a deload to be required. For very advanced lifters that have very strong, large, and volume-resistant muscles, it can take only 3-4 weeks of accumulation training to reach systemic MRV and need to deload. The deload phase is designed to bring down the fatigue from the accumulation phase, and it usually only lasts a week or so (one microcycle).

When you begin a mesocycle of training, you should probably begin at or close to your MEV for all the muscle groups you’d like to improve during that mesocycle, for reasons described extensively in our book on the subject of training volume. Week to week, you can manipulate working sets by using the Set Progression algorithm from the Training Volume Landmarks for Muscle Growth (link) article. You should seek to keep reps stable from week to week while letting your RIR decline from a 3 or 4 RIR start until it gets down to 0 (for exercises that don’t threaten the bar falling on you) or 1 (for those that do) in the last week of training. The way you keep the reps stable as RIR falls is by adding weight to the exercises you’re using. How much weight to add is a matter of an educated guess on your part. You want to add enough weight to get your target RIR with the same reps as last week. For example, if you did 100lbs last week for 10 reps on your first set of an exercise at 2 RIR, how much should you do next week to get 10 reps again but at 1 RIR? Well, you might think that adding 2.5lbs would be too easy, and you could honestly get 11 reps with that next week at 1 RIR, but adding 10lbs might require you to push to 0 RIR to get 10 reps, so you would just add 5lbs and that will probably take you where you need to be. If you’re making very rapid gains on an exercise, you might have a few weeks here and there where even though you increased weight by a bit, your RIR didn’t decline. You might have hit 8 reps at 100lbs at 3 RIR last week, and then hit 8 reps again at 3 RIR with 105lbs this week! This is a good thing, and lots of these weeks are how beginners can sometimes crank out up to 12 weeks of accumulation. Since getting to failure too soon is MUCH WORSE than getting there a bit slower, we recommend being conservative on nearly all weekly weight additions.

If you can’t realistically add weight, you can add reps. This might happen when, for example, you are using the 25lb dumbbells one week and then having to do the 30lbers next week, wildly slashing your reps. Just remember to stay within your general rep range and not leave it in any given meso. If you start at sets of about 5 reps, don’t add any more reps than will give you sets of 10, because that will take you out of the 5-10 range and no longer fulfil the needs of your training program in the way it was intended. If you start to exit a range by adding reps, add weight to take yourself back into that range, even if the increments are big and take you all the way down to the bottom of the range. Yes, this might mean that last week you were doing 20 reps with the 20lb dumbbells on your first set, and this week you’re back to only 10 reps with the 25lbers at the same or one less RIR, but that’s proper training!

 Once you cannot tie previous reps in at least two consecutive sessions for a given muscle group, you have likely hit its local MRV, and need to reduce its training volume. Our recommendation is to take the next planned session with half of the planned working sets, half of the planned reps, and half of the load for recovery. In the session after, resume your load progression from before, but start at a number of sets halfway between where you started the meso and your MRV set number, and an RIR of around 2. Thus, for example, if you hit 100lbs for 10 reps on a first set last session (6 total sets in the session for that muscle group), whereas the week before, you hit 95lbs for 12 reps, your next workout can be 50lbs for 3 sets of about 5 reps. Then, next week, you resume with 105lbs, but shoot for 2 RIR and do 4 sets total, because you started the meso at 2 sets, and 4 is halfway between 2 and 6 sets. Continue to train normally after that until and unless you hit MRV again.

Systemic MRV is when you’re training so hard that your sleep quality declines, your appetite falls, and you might get sick more often. It’s also when nearly all of your muscles start to hit local MRVs at about the same time. Once that happens (and be honest with yourself when it does), stop the accumulation phase and begin the deload phase.

The deload can be done many ways, but our recommendation is to take sets to MEV for the whole week. The load should be week 1’s load for the first half of the week and ½ of week 1’s load for the second half. The reps should be roughly half of all week 1’s reps for all sets during the deload week. This makes the deload VERY EASY, which is the whole point, since hard training doesn’t bring down fatigue! You should feel refreshed and be craving hard training toward the end of your deload week if you’re setting it up correctly.

Those are the basics of periodization over the mesoscycle. The training block is a sequence of mesoscycles strung together for one unifying purpose. For example, a muscle gain block may be 3 mesocycles of 6 weeks each, one after another, with weight gain the goal for all 18 of those total weeks, or a fat loss block might be 2 mesocycles of 5 weeks long during which weight loss is the goal for all 10 of those weeks.

Though we can potentially alter all training variables over a training block, frequency, exercise selection, and loading are definitely noteworthy.

Frequency:
When you start a training block, your MEVs are very low and so are your weekly MRVs. Thus, you can fit your total training volume relatively easily into lower frequencies, such as 2x per week per muscle group, for example. As training progresses and you start your next meso, not only do your per-session MEVs go up, but your weekly MRVs go up as well, making fitting all your training into just a few sessions more difficult. As well, you’re now quite used to the exercises, and recovery between sessions occurs much faster, allowing a higher frequency microcycle to be much more realistic. At this point, you can increase your frequency a bit, perhaps to an average of something like 3x per muscle group, for example. In the last one or two mesos, your per-session MEVs are very high and your per-week MRVs even higher. To really get the best gains, another bump in frequency is recommended, and you might go to 4x or so training per muscle group, and perhaps even higher.

Unfortunately, super high frequencies might not be the most sustainable for a couple of reasons. First, muscles heal faster than connective tissues, and if you train with very high frequencies, sometimes your connective tissue recovery can lag behind your muscle recovery, which may set you up for injuries if unabated. Secondly, the sheer weekly volume that higher frequencies let you do productively might cause so much fatigue escalation as to not be sustainable for longer than a mesocycle or two. Thus, after training for a meso or two at your highest frequency, you might end the training block and seek to reduce the very high fatigue levels you have accumulated, in part by starting whatever phase you start next at lower frequencies.

Exercise Selection:
For normal exercise selection decisions, you can just follow the 4-part exercise deletion and replacement guidelines in the variation section above. But as you add sessions from meso to meso with a climbing frequency, you’ll need to consider adding exercises. Yes, you can repeat exercises a few times in the week with different loads, but we recommend doing this sparingly, and more often adding in new exercises when you add new sessions as frequency climbs. Thus, you might start with an exercise on Monday and a different one on Thursday in a 2x meso, but when you move to 3x, you might have to add a new exercise on Friday, keeping the Monday exercise the same and moving the Thursday exercise to Wednesday. Because fatigue and wear and tear increase with each meso in a block, we recommend adding less systemically disruptive exercises more often than adding more disruptive ones. For example, you might consider adding some machine rear laterals on that Friday 3x session but adding barbell face pulls to an already fatiguing week of rear delt training might be overkill. Yes, you can add very tough movements as you go, but we recommend against it in most cases. Thus, you start with pretty much only or mostly basic, high-stress moves such as barbell face pulls and dumbbell face pulls earlier in the block, and later on add dumbbell rear laterals, machine rear laterals, and other such less fatiguing exercises as you add in sessions to expand frequency over the training block.

Loading:
Whatever exercises you’ve carried over from one meso to the next should be done in the same rep ranges as they were done in the last mesos. For example, if you did barbell face pulls in the 5-10 rep range on a first set in the last meso, in the next meso, you should continue your loading progression to stay in that same rep range, which often means just adding small increments of weight from where you last left off in the last meso, or lightening up the weight just enough to get similar reps at 3-4 RIR again in the first week. But for new exercises added in each meso as frequency goes up, we recommend adding in the moderate (10-20) and light (20-30) rep ranges instead of the heavy (5-10) range. This recommendation occurs for two reasons. First, as you take on more wear and tear and fatigue, adding more 5-10 rep movements might cause a large increase in injury risk, especially now that you’re asking your body to perform with such heavy loads with even less recovery time between sessions. Secondly, very high rep (20-30) training seems to cause robust gains over a meso or two, but in part because your body adapts to buffering metabolites so quickly, might not work nearly as well for much longer. Thus, you may want to start with heavier training in the first meso of a block, keep it for all remaining mesos, and add in lighter training with new sessions as you go, which also pairs well with the selection of less fatiguing exercises. Here’s an example of how that might look for the rear delts:

Meso 1:

Monday Barbell Face Pulls (5-10)
Thursday Dumbbell Face Pulls (10-20)
Meso 2:

Monday Barbell Face Pulls (5-10)
Wednesday Dumbbell Face Pulls (10-20)
Friday Dumbbell Rear Laterals (10-20)
Meso 3:

Monday Barbell Face Pulls (5-10)
Wednesday Dumbbell Face Pulls (10-20)
Friday Dumbbell Rear Laterals (10-20)
Saturday Machine Rear Laterals (20-30)
Once you’ve done a whole training block, you can do a mesocycle of low frequency (2x) training at MV with mostly 5-10 rep ranges and compound movements to resensitize your muscles to volume and growth again. This meso can take about a month and can be good to pair with maintenance eating to bring down any diet fatigue you might have from hard dieting in the last block. If you don’t have any real diet fatigue, you can instead take around 2 weeks of active rest (sometimes just one week if you count the deload after your last meso), where you train with 1x frequency for every muscle, with only about 2 working sets per muscle per session, and with weights that are around 50% of your 5-10 range, but doing them for only 5-10 reps per set. This ultra-easy training can make you ready for another whole block of training in the gym and can even be replaced with no training at all if you’re feeling really beat up or tired. Once you’ve taken this easy time, you’re probably ready to give another training block a go!

TRAINING MODALITIES
Straight Sets
Straight sets are sets performed to 0-4 RIR, with enough rest time to recover all 4 limiting factors (see the rest time section above for details).
Straight sets are a good choice for rear delts, though rear delts recover quickly enough to be high candidates for myoreps in many cases.
Down Sets
Down sets are straight sets, but with less weight (usually 10-20% less) than the previous straight sets. By lowering the weight, you can keep reps over 5 per set, and/or keep the mind-muscle connection high and keep technique excellent to continue to have a high stimulus to fatigue ratio in every set of that exercise.  
Can be an excellent tool for rear delt training, as the mind-muscle connection can improve with a load reduction and rear delts are notoriously hard to connect with.
Controlled Eccentrics and Pauses
Concentric, eccentric, and isometric phases of each exercise can be between half a second and 3 seconds long and still confer near-optimal effects on hypertrophy. In some cases, slowing down eccentrics and extending pauses can enhance technique, mind-muscle connection, and safety of the exercise.
Peak contraction at the top of reps can be excellent for rear delts, but it’s hard to do with without the back taking over the mind-muscle connection. Of all the muscle groups, controlled eccentrics and pauses might have the least utility for rear delts.
Giant Sets 
Giant sets give you a certain weight to lift, an RIR range to hit (usually 0-4 RIR), and a goal of total reps over as many sets as it takes. An example is aiming to do 100lbs for however many sets it takes to get 60 total reps, while taking normal rest between each set. Such an approach can take the focus off of having to match or exceed the per-set reps you did last week, and can thus let you super-focus on technique and the mind-muscle connection, thus potentially improving both and getting more out of the training with exercises than can demand lots of technique and mind-muscle connection to be effective. If you’d like to be super precise in counting sets for your volume landmarks, we recommend counting giant sets at 2/3 of the contribution of straight sets, such that if you did 6 total sets to get to your giant set rep target, you can count that as 4 sets of “straight set equivalency” in terms of stimulus and fatigue. This discount is because with a higher focus on technique and mind-muscle connection and a lower focus on getting as many reps per set as possible, giant sets likely don’t cause as much fatigue as straight sets.
These are excellent for rear delts, and probably more worthwhile for them than any other muscle group. Rear delts are very tough to connect with, and taking the onus off of performance and putting onto technique and mind-muscle connection can pay huge dividends.
Myoreps
Myoreps are just like straight sets in that they must check all 4 recovery boxes before doing another set. However, they are different in two ways. First, while the first set is usually between 10-20 reps (0-2 RIR), the next multiple sets only rest long enough to get between 5 and 10 reps each. This is to maximize the ratio of effective (near-failure) reps to total reps over the multiple sets. Secondly, for all of those successive sets to register the highest number of effective reps per set, the local recovery factor (the muscle and its motor nerve) must be by far the most limiting, so that successive sets are not limited by the CNS, the lungs, and other muscles and thus the final reps of each set really do recruit and tense the fastest and most growth-prone motor units. For this to be possible, only isolation exercises without limiting synergists are appropriate for myoreps. If you’d like to be super precise in counting sets for your volume landmarks, we recommend counting myorep sets each as the equivalent of a straight set. While they do have fewer reps, they are often taken closer to failure and thus turn out to be about as fatiguing.
Very good for rear delt training, because they are so unlimited by systemic and synergist fatigue in most cases. However, pick a movement for these that has a higher mind-muscle connection (cable face pulls for many people, for example), as the near-failure approach of myoreps can really challenge it.
Drop Sets
Drop sets are exactly like myoreps, but with even shorter rest times because weight is reduced by 10-20% on average between each set. The effects are very similar. The advantage of drop sets is their time saving, and their slight disadvantage over myoreps is that dropping the weight a lot can reduce mind-muscle connection via reducing tension perception. If you’d like to be super precise in counting sets for your volume landmarks, we recommend counting drop sets each as the equivalent of a straight set. While they do have fewer reps and lighter loads, they are often taken closer to failure and in such rapid and painful succession that they turn out to be about as fatiguing.
A decent choice, though be wary of mind-muscle connection losses with increasing pain levels.
Pre-Exhaust Supersets
These supersets begin with an isolation exercise for a given muscle group, and with no rest after taking it to 0-2 RIR, end with a compound exercise to which the target muscle is a big contributor. The local pre-exhaust of the isolation exercise allows the target muscle to be by far the limiting factor for the compound exercise that follows, and lets it be exposed to a few more effective reps than it otherwise would be if that compound was done fresh. After each 2-exercise superset, 4-factor rest is again taken until the next 2-exercise superset begins. If you’d like to be super precise in counting sets for your volume landmarks, we recommend counting pre-exhaust supersets as 1.5x as the equivalent of a straight set. This is because the compound exercise done in the second part of the set is only limited (highly) by the target pre-exhausted muscle, and this isn’t nearly as fatiguing, especially systemically, as it would be if it were done fresh.
Almost indispensable for rear delts. Doing something like a rear delt machine flye supersetted into a face pull can highly enhance the mind-muscle connection with the rear delts on the face pull and give them that much more stimulus.
Occlusion Sets
Occlusion training is myorep training with the limb occluded just above the muscle. This occlusion causes the local muscle and nerve to be far and away the limiting factors on recovery between sets, and thus allows you to focus in on a target muscle group that might have otherwise been difficult to reach with non-occluded movements. The big benefit is time saving, because rest between occluded sets is only long enough to get another 5 reps, and you can also use weights at the very low end of the growth range and even a bit lower (20-30% 1RM). The downside is that the local vasculature adapts very quickly to occlusion, so it might not be very effective for any more than a mesocycle or two in a row. Also, some muscles are much harder than others to occlude, or even impossible to occlude. If you’d like to be super precise in counting sets for your volume landmarks, we recommend counting occlusion sets each as the equivalent of 2/3 of a straight set, as they cause much less systemic fatigue due to the lower reps and weights used.
Tough to occlude these, so you can give it a try, but don’t expect much.

SIDE DELT SIZE TRAINING TIPS

Updated: Feb 05, 2021

Let's also review our key training volume landmarks and relate them to training the back: 


MV = Maintenance Volume:
Perhaps around 6 sets per week are needed to maintain side delt size for experienced trainers. We recommend 2 weekly sessions for maintenance, so that’s 3 sets per session, and can do up to 3 sessions at 2 sets each as well.

MEV = Minimum Effective Volume:
Most intermediate-advanced lifters need at least 8 sets of direct side delt work per week to make gains, and for some, it’s even more than that. If you’re training twice a week, that’s about 4 sets per session. It’s about 2-3 sets per session for 3x training, 2 sets for 4x training, and 1-2 sets or so for 5x or 6x training. Because the side delts recover so fast, they are probably best trained at a 3x weekly minimum in many cases.

MAV = Maximum Adaptive Volume:
The maximum adaptive volume of a single session of any trained muscle group is still speculative, but research suggests it’s probably no lower than 4 working sets per session and no higher than 12 working sets per session in most intermediates. When you design your program and progressions, having lots of sessions with much fewer than 4 working sets per muscle group per session for multiple weeks on end might not be very efficient, and you might benefit from combining a few of these lower volume sessions to get the same volume but in fewer weekly sessions. Also, not exceeding 12 sets per session per muscle group for more than a few weeks is probably a good idea.

MRV = Maximum Recoverable Volume:
The MRV depends highly on the number of sessions per week. With 2 sessions, the average intermediate MRV for side delts might be around 25 sets per week. This is higher than most because the side delts take on so little damage from most training and recover so fast.  With three sessions, it’s closer to 30 sets per week. With 4 sessions, it’s around 35 sets, and with 5 or 6 weekly sessions, it might be as high as 40 sets per week in many cases.


EXERCISES
Barbell Upright Row
Cable Cross Body Lateral Raise
Cable Face Pull
Dumbbell Upright Row
Lateral Raise
Leaning Cable Lateral Raise
Machine Lateral Raise
Smith Machine Upright Row
Thumbs Down Lateral Raise
Top Hold Lateral Raise

VARIATION
Within a training session, we recommend including between 1 and 2 different side delt exercises, but no more than that in most cases, as doing more than 2 side delt movements in one session is likely just a needless burning of potential exercise variations you can save for later days (since side delt frequency is often high) and mesocycles. Within a single week (microcycle) of training, we recommend between 2 and 5 different side delt exercises. For example, if you train side delts 3x a week, you can do a heavy barbell upright row on one day, a lighter barbell upright row on the next day, and a side lateral version on the last day for 2 total exercises in the week. On the other hand, if you train side delts 6x per week, you might want to choose (though don’t have to choose) as many as 5 different exercises, with only one of them repeated in a heavier/lighter arrangement. Because you want to keep exercises variations fresh for when you need to change exercises (through injury or staleness, for example), you should use as few exercises per week (and thus, per mesocycle, as we recommend keeping the same exercises in every week of each meso) as you can to get the job done. If you can just do a few more sets of barbell upright rows and get a great workout, there’s no reason to switch to dumbbell upright rows, for example. If you’re doing an exercise, there should be a reason for it.

 Lastly, how do you know when it’s time to switch out a given exercise from your rotation to another exercise in your list of effective choices? The decision is based on answering just a few questions about the exercise you’re currently using:

Are you still making gains in rep strength on the exercise?
Is the exercise causing any aches or pains that are connective tissue related? And are these getting worse with each week or several weeks?
Is there a phasic need for the exercise to change? In other words, is the exercise appropriate for the rep range you’re trying to use it for? You might be able to do sets of 5-10 in barbell upright rows just fine, but anything under 10 reps is some combination of dangerous and absurd for laterals, for example.
Are you getting a good mind-muscle connection on the exercise, or is it feeling stale and annoying to do?
 If you are still hitting PRs on the exercise, it’s not causing any undue pains, you’re getting a good mind-muscle connection, and there’s no other need to change it, then don’t change it! If this means you keep an exercise around for up to a year or more, so be it! But if an exercise isn’t yielding any more PRs for a whole meso (especially on a muscle gain or maintenance phase), if it’s hurting you in the “bad” way, if it feels super stale, and/or if you have to dump it because it’s not appropriate to an upcoming rep range target, then you should replace it. Many times, the questions will fall on both sides, and then it’s up to you to make a wise choice considering all the 4 variables above.

RANGE OF MOTION
It’s worth noting that there can be TOO much ROM on shoulder moves, especially laterals and upright rows. How high should you pull the weights? Well, as high as you can with NO PAIN. If it hurts, don’t pull as high or play with your grip to find a way to pull your highest without sacrificing your joint safety.

LOADING
In general, like all muscles, the side delts benefit from weights in the 30%-85% 1RM range, which in many people roughly translates to a weight that results in between 5 and 30 reps on a first set taken to failure. We can split this range into heavy (5-10,) moderate (10-20), and light (20-30) categories, as there are tradeoffs to make between all of them.

The first point on loading is that the side delts, like most muscles, seem to benefit from some training in all three of the rep ranges listed above. Because the moderate (10-20 rep) range often offers the best tradeoff between stimulus, fatigue, injury risk, and slow/fast fiber specificity, and mind-muscle connection, an argument can be made that a first-time program design could have most weekly working sets for the side delts in this range, perhaps up to about 50% of them. The other 50% can perhaps be split evenly between the heavy (5-10) and light (20-30) rep ranges, as loading range diversity has been shown to be a potential benefit in its own right.

We must note that very few people seem to respond very well to side delt training in the 5-10 rep range, so while such a range should be experimented with early on in side delt training and if/when a plateau in gains presents itself, it’s perhaps not mandated for inclusion in most people’s training most of the time. Additionally, side delt training in the 20-30 range seems very productive for most lifters, even perhaps as productive as side delt training in the 10-20 range. Safe execution and a low mind-muscle connection precludes much 5-10 range side delt training, and the likely slower-twitch predominance of the side delts probably enhances its responses in the 20-30 rep range.

When constructing a weekly training plan, it’s probably a good idea to train the heavy ranges before the lighter ranges. Because both types of training cause fatigue, they all interfere with each other to some extent. However, the muscle and connective tissue damage from heavier training is likely more substantial and presents a higher risk of injury if some damage already exists from earlier training. Thus, if you do sets of 5-10 on Monday and (nearly always) sustain some form of micro-tearing, sets of 10-20 on Wednesday are lower in absolute force magnitude and are unlikely to cause the micro-tearing to expand into a notable injury. On the other hand, if you’re pre-damaged from lots of sets of 10-20 on Monday, going even heavier in such a state on Wednesday in the 5-10 range is a bit more likely to result in injury. Thus, a potential sequencing of heavy-moderate-light during the week might be advisable, with a day or two of extra rest after the light session and before the next heavy session to make sure most damage has been healed and another productive week can begin.

A sample arrangement of exercises, sets, and loads can look something like this:

Monday:

Barbell Upright Rows 3 sets 5-10 reps
Dumbbell Side Lateral Raises 3 sets 10-20 reps
Wednesday:

Dummbell Side Lateral Raise 4 sets, 10-20 reps
Dumbbell Upright Rows 4 sets, 10-20 reps
Friday:

Thumbs Down Lateral Raises 4 sets, 20-30 reps
Cable Upright Rows 4 sets, 20-30 reps
Based on your personal responses to each of the main rep ranges, you can adjust how much volume you perform in any of them. For example, if you notice that you get a better stimulus (pumps, soreness, mind-muscle connection, etc.) and lower fatigue (joint stress, systemic fatigue, joint soreness, etc.) in some of the ranges vs. others, you can do more sets in those ranges and a bit less in others, though you should in most cases still include at least some work in the least productive ranges. For example, you might find that neither 5-10 nor 10-20 rep ranges work very well for your side delt training, so you might only do a few sets of both in most weeks and do the vast majority of your sets in the 20-30 range. 


REST TIMES
When determining how long to rest between any two sets in training, our goal is for enough rest to be taken such that the next set is at least close to maximally productive. How can we ensure this? By answering 4 basic questions about our recovery status:

Has the target muscle locally recovered to do at least 5 reps on the next set?
Has the nervous system recovered enough to remove it as a limiting factor to target muscle performance?
Has the cardiorespiratory system recovered enough to remove it as a limiting factor to target muscle performance?
Have synergist muscles in the exercise being performed recovered enough to remove them as a limiting factors to target muscle performance?
 It might take only 1-2 minutes to recover very well (let’s say, 90%) on all of those factors, but because set to set recovery is asymptotic in nature, it might take another 3 minutes to get to 95% recovery and another 10 minutes more to get to 99% recovery. Since you only have so much time to spend in the gym, 10 “90% recovered sets” in 45 minutes of training is a much more anabolic stimulus than only 3 “99% recovered” sets in that same amount of time. Thus, our recommendation is to make sure you can clearly check all 4 boxes of recovery above, but to not wait much longer than what can be considered “very good” recovery in the incredibly inefficient quest for “near perfect recovery.”

 Here’s an example of what can be considered “very good” recovery between sets of side delt training. Before you do another set of barbell upright rows, ask yourself:

Are my side delts still burning from the last set, or do they feel ok again?
Do I feel like I can pull hard with my side delts again, and I am mentally ready for another hard set, or do I need more time to rest?
Is my breathing more or less back to normal, or is it still very heavy?
Are my forearms and biceps still very fatigued, or are they ready to support my side delts in the upcoming set of barbell upright rows?
If you can get the green light on all of these, you’re probably ready to do another set, and waiting much longer will almost certainly not be of benefit.

 You’ll notice that depending on the exercise and on the lifter, very different rest times will be generated by this questionnaire. For example, seated machine side laterals might not even have synergist muscles, so question 4 doesn’t even apply and rest times can be less than 15 seconds, whereas barbell upright rows might need 2 minutes between sets just to regain normal breathing. And if you’re on the larger and stronger side of things, and your cardio isn’t great, you’ll be resting much longer than someone smaller, not as strong, and in excellent cardio shape. While average rest times between sets of hamstrings training will be between 15 seconds and 2 minutes, the most important consideration is to take the rest time you need, and not copy someone else’s, rush the process, or sit around needlessly for minutes after all 4 factors are good to go for your next set to commence.  

FREQUENCY
There are two main considerations for determining training frequency. The first is the duration of the increase in muscle growth seen after a bout of training between MEV and MRV. If such an increase in muscle growth lasts 7 days, then perhaps a once a week frequency is optimal. If such an increase lasts only a day, then perhaps 6 days a week for the same muscle group is much better. While direct research on muscle growth timecourses is very limited, it seems that typical training might cause a reliable 24-48 hour increase in muscle growth. This would mean that if muscle growth elevation was the only variable of concern with regards to frequency, we should train every muscle 3-6 times per week.

However, the second main consideration on determining training frequency is recovery. A single bout of training between MEV and MRV causes muscle growth to occur, but it also presents some degree of fatigue. If we are to progress in training and allow adaptations to fully take hold over days and weeks, we must allow enough time to elapse between overloading sessions for at least most fatigue to dissipate. On average, the exact amount of fatigue dissipation must be at least enough to allow performance to return to baseline or higher, such than an overload can be presented. In other words, if you can normally barbell upright row 75 for 15 reps, asking yourself “when should my next side delt workout be after this last one” can be answered by “when will you be recovered enough to be able to upright row at least 75 for 15 reps?” The timecourse of fatigue is usually a bit longer than that of muscle growth, unfortunately, so that for most people, recovery, not muscle growth cessation, will be the limiting factor on frequency. In most per-session MEV-MRV training volumes, fatigue will take between 1-2 days to come back down enough to restore or improve on past performance, and that highly depends on the muscle in question and even the exercises used.

How do you determine what training frequency is appropriate for you? You can start by training your side delts at per-session MEV volumes. After each session, you note when soreness has abated and when you feel recovered enough psychologically to attempt another overloading workout. When you’re ready, and no later, go back to the gym and train side delts again, with volumes just a bit higher than MEV (using the RP Set Progression Algorithm). If you’re recovering on time, keep coming back and training your side delts as often as you have been. If you notice that you need more time to recover, add a day to your next post-side delt-training window. If you’re recovering faster than you thought you could, train a bit more often. After a mesocycle of such adjustments, you will have a rough but very good guess as to what your average side delt training frequency can be for most of your programs going forward. In fact, your frequency will not only be tailored exactly to your responses, but you’ll be pretty sure it’s close to optimal because it was literally derived from how fast you can recover; which is the very primary variable that determines frequency.

Just so that you have some expectation of where to start, most individuals can recover from side delt training at a timecourse that allows for 3-6 sessions of side delts per week at MEV-MRV. However, only through direct experimentation on yourself can you tell where in this range is best for you and if maybe you’re even outside of this range. Just remember that so long as you’re recovered to train again (can perform at or above normal levels), training is a better idea than waiting to train, because higher frequency programs, at least in the short term, have shown to generate more muscle growth than needlessly lower ones.

To improve your training frequency, you can alternate exercise selections between successive side delt workouts. For example, if you do barbell upright rows on one day, you might do dumbbell upright rows or machine side laterals the next day, and so on. This rotation of slightly different exercises and movement patterns can take repeated stress off of very small and specific parts of your muscles and connective tissues, which might reduce chronic injury risk exposure.



PERIODIZATION
 There are a few relevant timescales in periodization:

The repetition (1-9 seconds)
The set (5-30 repetitions)
The exercise (1-5 sets)
The session (2-6 exercises)
The day (0-2 sessions)
The microcycle (usually 1 week of training)
The mesocycle (3-12 weeks)
The block (1-4 mesoscycles)
The macrocycle (1-4 blocks)
We’ve already covered the most important details on most of these timescales, so in this section, we’ll focus on a brief understanding of how to manipulate training over a typical mesocycle and training block.

A mesocycle is composed of two phases: the accumulation phase and the deload phase. The accumulation phase lasts as long as it takes to hit systemic MRV, which, because fatigue accumulates in MEV+ training, has to happen at some point. For beginners with very high recovery abilities, it can take up to 12 weeks of increasingly more demanding training for systemic MRV to be reached and a deload to be required. For very advanced lifters that have very strong, large, and volume-resistant muscles, it can take only 3-4 weeks of accumulation training to reach systemic MRV and need to deload. The deload phase is designed to bring down the fatigue from the accumulation phase, and it usually only lasts a week or so (one microcycle).

When you begin a mesocycle of training, you should probably begin at or close to your MEV for all the muscle groups you’d like to improve during that mesocycle, for reasons described extensively in our book on the subject of training volume. Week to week, you can manipulate working sets by using the Set Progression algorithm from the Training Volume Landmarks for Muscle Growth (link) article. You should seek to keep reps stable from week to week while letting your RIR decline from a 3 or 4 RIR start until it gets down to 0 (for exercises that don’t threaten the bar falling on you) or 1 (for those that do) in the last week of training. The way you keep the reps stable as RIR falls is by adding weight to the exercises you’re using. How much weight to add is a matter of an educated guess on your part. You want to add enough weight to get your target RIR with the same reps as last week. For example, if you did 100lbs last week for 10 reps on your first set of an exercise at 2 RIR, how much should you do next week to get 10 reps again but at 1 RIR? Well, you might think that adding 2.5lbs would be too easy, and you could honestly get 11 reps with that next week at 1 RIR, but adding 10lbs might require you to push to 0 RIR to get 10 reps, so you would just add 5lbs and that will probably take you where you need to be. If you’re making very rapid gains on an exercise, you might have a few weeks here and there where even though you increased weight by a bit, your RIR didn’t decline. You might have hit 8 reps at 100lbs at 3 RIR last week, and then hit 8 reps again at 3 RIR with 105lbs this week! This is a good thing, and lots of these weeks are how beginners can sometimes crank out up to 12 weeks of accumulation. Since getting to failure too soon is MUCH WORSE than getting there a bit slower, we recommend being conservative on nearly all weekly weight additions.

If you can’t realistically add weight, you can add reps. This might happen when, for example, you are using the 25lb dumbbells one week and then having to do the 30lbers next week, wildly slashing your reps. Just remember to stay within your general rep range and not leave it in any given meso. If you start at sets of about 5 reps, don’t add any more reps than will give you sets of 10, because that will take you out of the 5-10 range and no longer fulfil the needs of your training program in the way it was intended. If you start to exit a range by adding reps, add weight to take yourself back into that range, even if the increments are big and take you all the way down to the bottom of the range. Yes, this might mean that last week you were doing 20 reps with the 20lb dumbbells on your first set, and this week you’re back to only 10 reps with the 25lbers at the same or one less RIR, but that’s proper training!

Once you cannot tie previous reps in at least two consecutive sessions for a given muscle group, you have likely hit its local MRV, and need to reduce its training volume. Our recommendation is to take the next planned session with half of the planned working sets, half of the planned reps, and half of the load for recovery. In the session after, resume your load progression from before, but start at a number of sets halfway between where you started the meso and your MRV set number, and an RIR of around 2. Thus, for example, if you hit 100lbs for 10 reps on a first set last session (6 total sets in the session for that muscle group), whereas the week before, you hit 95lbs for 12 reps, your next workout can be 50lbs for 3 sets of about 5 reps. Then, next week, you resume with 105lbs, but shoot for 2 RIR and do 4 sets total, because you started the meso at 2 sets, and 4 is halfway between 2 and 6 sets. Continue to train normally after that until and unless you hit MRV again.

Systemic MRV is when you’re training so hard that your sleep quality declines, your appetite falls, and you might get sick more often. It’s also when nearly all of your muscles start to hit local MRVs at about the same time. Once that happens (and be honest with yourself when it does), stop the accumulation phase and begin the deload phase.

The deload can be done many ways, but our recommendation is to take sets to MEV for the whole week. The load should be week 1’s load for the first half of the week and ½ of week 1’s load for the second half. The reps should be roughly half of all week 1’s reps for all sets during the deload week. This makes the deload VERY EASY, which is the whole point, since hard training doesn’t bring down fatigue! You should feel refreshed and be craving hard training toward the end of your deload week if you’re setting it up correctly.

Those are the basics of periodization over the mesoscycle. The training block is a sequence of mesoscycles strung together for one unifying purpose. For example, a muscle gain block may be 3 mesocycles of 6 weeks each, one after another, with weight gain the goal for all 18 of those total weeks, or a fat loss block might be 2 mesocycles of 5 weeks long during which weight loss is the goal for all 10 of those weeks.

Though we can potentially alter all training variables over a training block, frequency, exercise selection, and loading are definitely noteworthy.

Frequency:
When you start a training block, your MEVs are very low and so are your weekly MRVs. Thus, you can fit your total training volume relatively easily into lower frequencies, such as 2x per week per muscle group, for example. As training progresses and you start your next meso, not only do your per-session MEVs go up, but your weekly MRVs go up as well, making fitting all your training into just a few sessions more difficult. As well, you’re now quite used to the exercises, and recovery between sessions occurs much faster, allowing a higher frequency microcycle to be much more realistic. At this point, you can increase your frequency a bit, perhaps to an average of something like 3x per muscle group, for example. In the last one or two mesos, your per-session MEVs are very high and your per-week MRVs even higher. To really get the best gains, another bump in frequency is recommended, and you might go to 4x or so training per muscle group, and perhaps even higher.

Unfortunately, super high frequencies might not be the most sustainable for a couple of reasons. First, muscles heal faster than connective tissues, and if you train with very high frequencies, sometimes your connective tissue recovery can lag behind your muscle recovery, which may set you up for injuries if unabated. Secondly, the sheer weekly volume that higher frequencies let you do productively might cause so much fatigue escalation as to not be sustainable for longer than a mesocycle or two. Thus, after training for a meso or two at your highest frequency, you might end the training block and seek to reduce the very high fatigue levels you have accumulated, in part by starting whatever phase you start next at lower frequencies.

Exercise Selection:
For normal exercise selection decisions, you can just follow the 4-part exercise deletion and replacement guidelines in the variation section above. But as you add sessions from meso to meso with a climbing frequency, you’ll need to consider adding exercises. Yes, you can repeat exercises a few times in the week with different loads, but we recommend doing this sparingly, and more often adding in new exercises when you add new sessions as frequency climbs. Thus, you might start with an exercise on Monday and a different one on Thursday in a 2x meso, but when you move to 3x, you might have to add a new exercise on Friday, keeping the Monday exercise the same and moving the Thursday exercise to Wednesday. Because fatigue and wear and tear increase with each meso in a block, we recommend adding less systemically disruptive exercises more often than adding more disruptive ones. For example, you might consider adding some machine side laterals on that Friday 3x session but adding barbell upright rows to an already fatiguing week of side delt training might be overkill. Yes, you can add very tough movements as you go, but we recommend against it in most cases. Thus, you start with pretty much only or mostly basic, high-stress moves such as barbell upright rows and dumbbell upright rows earlier in the block, and later on add dumbbell side laterals, machine side laterals, and other such less fatiguing exercises as you add in sessions to expand frequency over the training block.

Loading:
Whatever exercises you’ve carried over from one meso to the next should be done in the same rep ranges as they were done in the last mesos. For example, if you did barbell upright rows in the 5-10 rep range on a first set in the last meso, in the next meso, you should continue your loading progression to stay in that same rep range, which often means just adding small increments of weight from where you last left off in the last meso, or lightening up the weight just enough to get similar reps at 3-4 RIR again in the first week. But for new exercises added in each meso as frequency goes up, we recommend adding in the moderate (10-20) and light (20-30) rep ranges instead of the heavy (5-10) range. This recommendation occurs for two reasons. First, as you take on more wear and tear and fatigue, adding more 5-10 rep movements might cause a large increase in injury risk, especially now that you’re asking your body to perform with such heavy loads with even less recovery time between sessions. Secondly, very high rep (20-30) training seems to cause robust gains over a meso or two, but in part because your body adapts to buffering metabolites so quickly, might not work nearly as well for much longer. Thus, you may want to start with heavier training in the first meso of a block, keep it for all remaining mesos, and add in lighter training with new sessions as you go, which also pairs well with the selection of less fatiguing exercises. Here’s an example of how that might look for the side delts:

Meso 1:

Monday Barbell Upright Rows (5-10)
Thursday Dumbbell Upright Rows (10-20)
Meso 2:

Monday Barbell Upright Rows (5-10)
Wednesday Dumbbell Upright Rows (10-20)
Friday Dumbbell Rear Laterals (10-20)
Meso 3:

Monday Barbell Upright Rows (5-10)
Wednesday Dumbbell Upright Rows (10-20)
Friday Dumbbell Rear Laterals (10-20)
Saturday Machine Rear Laterals (20-30)
Once you’ve done a whole training block, you can do a mesocycle of low frequency (2x) training at MV with mostly 5-10 rep ranges and compound movements to resensitize your muscles to volume and growth again. This meso can take about a month and can be good to pair with maintenance eating to bring down any diet fatigue you might have from hard dieting in the last block. If you don’t have any real diet fatigue, you can instead take around 2 weeks of active rest (sometimes just one week if you count the deload after your last meso), where you train with 1x frequency for every muscle, with only about 2 working sets per muscle per session, and with weights that are around 50% of your 5-10 range, but doing them for only 5-10 reps per set. This ultra-easy training can make you ready for another whole block of training in the gym and can even be replaced with no training at all if you’re feeling really beat up or tired. Once you’ve taken this easy time, you’re probably ready to give another training block a go!

TRAINING MODALITIES
Straight Sets
Straight sets are sets performed to 0-4 RIR, with enough rest time to recover all 4 limiting factors (see the rest time section above for details).

  Straight sets are a good choice for side delts, though side delts recover quickly enough to be high candidates for myoreps in many cases.
Down Sets
Down sets are straight sets, but with less weight (usually 10-20% less) than the previous straight sets. By lowering the weight, you can keep reps over 5 per set, and/or keep the mind-muscle connection high and keep technique excellent to continue to have a high stimulus to fatigue ratio in every set of that exercise.  
   Can be an excellent tool for side delt training, as the mind-muscle connection can improve with a load reduction, and it’s easy for technique to break down on side delt training if the fatigue is too much and reps are too low.

Controlled Eccentrics and Pauses
Concentric, eccentric, and isometric phases of each exercise can be between half a second and 3 seconds long and still confer near-optimal effects on hypertrophy. In some cases, slowing down eccentrics and extending pauses can enhance technique, mind-muscle connection, and safety of the exercise.

   Controlled eccentrics can really enhance the mind-muscle connection of the side delts, and taking a pause at the bottom of upright rows and lateral raises  can re-stabilize the body and prevent technique errors. You can also try to hold the peak contraction of laterals for a second or two, and that can greatly enhance the mind-muscle connection.

Giant Sets 
Giant sets give you a certain weight to lift, an RIR range to hit (usually 0-4 RIR), and a goal of total reps over as many sets as it takes. An example is aiming to do 100lbs for however many sets it takes to get 60 total reps, while taking normal rest between each set. Such an approach can take the focus off of having to match or exceed the per-set reps you did last week, and can thus let you super-focus on technique and the mind-muscle connection, thus potentially improving both and getting more out of the training with exercises than can demand lots of technique and mind-muscle connection to be effective. If you’d like to be super precise in counting sets for your volume landmarks, we recommend counting giant sets at 2/3 of the contribution of straight sets, such that if you did 6 total sets to get to your giant set rep target, you can count that as 4 sets of “straight set equivalency” in terms of stimulus and fatigue. This discount is because with a higher focus on technique and mind-muscle connection and a lower focus on getting as many reps per set as possible, giant sets likely don’t cause as much fatigue as straight sets.

   These are excellent for side delts, and probably more worthwhile for them than any other muscle group except for rear delts perhaps. Side delt exercises are often very tempting to cheat with, especially if rep targets are clear and difficult to hit. By taking the pressure off of per-set reps, better technique can be worked on!

Myoreps
Myoreps are just like straight sets in that they must check all 4 recovery boxes before doing another set. However, they are different in two ways. First, while the first set is usually between 10-20 reps (0-2 RIR), the next multiple sets only rest long enough to get between 5 and 10 reps each. This is to maximize the ratio of effective (near-failure) reps to total reps over the multiple sets. Secondly, for all of those successive sets to register the highest number of effective reps per set, the local recovery factor (the muscle and its motor nerve) must be by far the most limiting, so that successive sets are not limited by the CNS, the lungs, and other muscles and thus the final reps of each set really do recruit and tense the fastest and most growth-prone motor units. For this to be possible, only isolation exercises without limiting synergists are appropriate for myoreps. If you’d like to be super precise in counting sets for your volume landmarks, we recommend counting myorep sets each as the equivalent of a straight set. While they do have fewer reps, they are often taken closer to failure and thus turn out to be about as fatiguing.

   Very good for side delt training, because they are so unlimited by systemic and synergist fatigue in most cases. However, pick a movement for these that has a higher mind-muscle connection (dumbbell side laterals face pulls for many people, for example), as the near-failure approach of myoreps can really challenge it, making an exercise like upright rows a potentially unwise choice.

Drop Sets
Drop sets are exactly like myoreps, but with even shorter rest times because weight is reduced by 10-20% on average between each set. The effects are very similar. The advantage of drop sets is their time saving, and their slight disadvantage over myoreps is that dropping the weight a lot can reduce mind-muscle connection via reducing tension perception. If you’d like to be super precise in counting sets for your volume landmarks, we recommend counting drop sets each as the equivalent of a straight set. While they do have fewer reps and lighter loads, they are often taken closer to failure and in such rapid and painful succession that they turn out to be about as fatiguing.

   A good choice, though be wary of mind-muscle connection losses with increasing pain levels.

Pre-Exhaust Supersets
These supersets begin with an isolation exercise for a given muscle group, and with no rest after taking it to 0-2 RIR, end with a compound exercise to which the target muscle is a big contributor. The local pre-exhaust of the isolation exercise allows the target muscle to be by far the limiting factor for the compound exercise that follows, and lets it be exposed to a few more effective reps than it otherwise would be if that compound was done fresh. After each 2-exercise superset, 4-factor rest is again taken until the next 2-exercise superset begins. If you’d like to be super precise in counting sets for your volume landmarks, we recommend counting pre-exhaust supersets as 1.5x as the equivalent of a straight set. This is because the compound exercise done in the second part of the set is only limited (highly) by the target pre-exhausted muscle, and this isn’t nearly as fatiguing, especially systemically, as it would be if it were done fresh.

   Almost indispensable for side delts. Doing something like a side delt machine flye supersetted into an upright row cann highly enhance the mind-muscle connection with the side delts on the upright row and give them that much more stimulus.

Occlusion Sets
Occlusion training is myorep training with the limb occluded just above the muscle. This occlusion causes the local muscle and nerve to be far and away the limiting factors on recovery between sets, and thus allows you to focus in on a target muscle group that might have otherwise been difficult to reach with non-occluded movements. The big benefit is time saving, because rest between occluded sets is only long enough to get another 5 reps, and you can also use weights at the very low end of the growth range and even a bit lower (20-30% 1RM). The downside is that the local vasculature adapts very quickly to occlusion, so it might not be very effective for any more than a mesocycle or two in a row. Also, some muscles are much harder than others to occlude, or even impossible to occlude. If you’d like to be super precise in counting sets for your volume landmarks, we recommend counting occlusion sets each as the equivalent of 2/3 of a straight set, as they cause much less systemic fatigue due to the lower reps and weights used.

   If you wrap the occlusion band around the inner part of your shoulder joint and through your armpit, you can occlude quite well for side delts. Though watch out for arm and forearm fatigue as limiting factors, and consider using vera grips to obviate grip fatigue.

TRAP (TRAPS) GROWTH TRAINING TIPS

Updated: Jan 05, 2020

Let's also review our key training volume landmarks and relate them to training the traps: 

MV = Maintenance Volume:
As long as you’re doing compound pulling and perhaps heavy deads, you don’t need direct trap work to keep your traps the same size. Even most advanced lifters shouldn’t see any losses in trap size if completely eliminating direct trap work, so long as they keep hammering their other compound pulling and shoulder work. If you’re just doing maintenance work cause you’re crunched for time and you’re doing shrugs… you could be using your time better!

MEV = Minimum Effective Volume:
Most intermediates can make great trap gains with NO direct trap work, as deadlifting, rowing, and side/rear delt training is going to be very simulative of the traps. Once you’re ready for direct work, as few as 4 weekly sets, split into at least 2 weekly sessions, can cause notable growth.

MAV = Maximum Adaptive Volume:
The maximum adaptive volume of a single session of any trained muscle group is still speculative, but research suggests it’s probably no lower than 4 working sets per session and no higher than 12 working sets per session in most intermediates. When you design your program and progressions, having lots of sessions with much fewer than 4 working sets per muscle group per week for multiple weeks on end might not be very efficient, and you might benefit from combining a few of these lower volume sessions to get the same volume but in fewer weekly sessions. Also, not exceeding 12 sets per session per muscle group for more than a few weeks is probably a good idea.

MRV = Maximum Recoverable Volume:
The traps have a very high fatigue threshold, which is no surprise because they kind of hold your shoulder girdle up all the time! However, excessive trap training will cost you, and in some unusual places, like the distal biceps tendons. That’s right, if you do enough shrugging, you are likely to aggravate your biceps tendons before even your traps are overworked. It’s not very common but it’s a legitimate concern. In the context of heavy back and delt training and especially deadlifting, the traps can see recovery problems from as few as 2 weekly sessions at around 10 sets per session. On the other hand, they can hit MRVs as high as 35-40 sets per week if higher (4-6x) weekly frequencies are used and if side delt and deadlift work is on the lower end, as well as if the exercise selection is lighter shrugs vs. super heavy barbell versions.

EXERCISES
Barbell Shrug

Barbell Bent Shrug

Dumbbell Shrug

Dumbbell Bent Shrug

Dumbbell Lean Shrug

Cable Single Arm Side Shrug

Cable Side Shrug

Seated Dumbbell Shrug

Cable Shrug

Cable Bent Shrug


VARIATION
Within a training session, we recommend including nor more than 1 trap exercise, as doing more than 1 trap movement in one session is likely just a needless burning of potential exercise variations you can save for later days and mesocycles. It’s also needless to do more than one exercise per session because traps have relatively low volume needs and tolerances in the context of an otherwise voluminous upper body program. Within a single week (microcycle) of training, we recommend between 2 and 3 different trap exercises. For example, if you train traps 3x a week, you can do a heavy barbell shrug on one day, a lighter barbell shrug on the next day, and a dumbbell shrug on the last day for 2 total exercises in the week. Because you want to keep exercises variations fresh for when you need to change exercises (through injury or staleness, for example), you should use as few exercises per week (and thus, per mesocycle, as we recommend keeping the same exercises in every week of each meso) as you can to get the job done. If you can just do a few more sets of barbell shrugs and get a great workout, there’s no reason to switch to dumbbell shrugs, for example. If you’re doing an exercise, there should be a reason for it.

Lastly, how do you know when it’s time to switch out a given exercise from your rotation to another exercise in your list of effective choices? The decision is based on answering just a few questions about the exercise you’re currently using:

Are you still making gains in rep strength on the exercise?
Is the exercise causing any aches or pains that are connective tissue related? And are these getting worse with each week or accumulating over multiple weeks?
Is there a phasic need for the exercise to change? In other words, is the exercise appropriate for the rep range you’re trying to use it for? Heavy barbell shrugs in the 5-10 rep range might be easy to set up and execute, but heavy dumbbell shrugs might be downright annoying (dragging out the 150’s might just cost you more fatigue than the shrug itself).
Are you getting a good mind-muscle connection on the exercise, or is it feeling stale and annoying to do?
If you are still hitting PRs on the exercise, it’s not causing any undue pains, you’re getting a good mind-muscle connection, and there’s no other need to change it, then don’t change it! If this means you keep an exercise around for up to a year or more, so be it! But, if an exercise isn’t yielding any more PRs for a whole meso (especially on a muscle gain or maintenance phase), hurting you beyond expected soreness, feels super stale, or is inappropriate for an upcoming rep range target, then you should replace it. Many times, the questions will fall on both sides, and then it’s up to you to make a wise choice considering all the 4 variables above.

RANGE OF MOTION
The best trap training is NOT done by loading up 405 on the bar and doing the funky pigeon dance where you bring your chin down to meet your chest instead of brining your shoulders up. Fully relaxing your traps between each rep and stopping for a 1 second peak contraction at the top of each rep can help lifters who have trouble with their mind-muscle connection, pump, and metabolite generation in their traps. In fact, very heavy trap training, while it might have its place in a trap-priority program, can be very axially fatiguing and can cost you on other muscle group progress in your program. 


LOADING
In general, like all muscles, the traps benefit from weights in the 30%-85% 1RM range, which in many people roughly translates to a weight that results in between 5 and 30 reps on a first set taken to failure. We can split this range into heavy (5-10,) moderate (10-20), and light (20-30) categories, as there are tradeoffs to make between all of them.

The first point on loading is that the traps, like most muscles, seem to benefit from some training in all three of the rep ranges listed above. Because the moderate (10-20 rep) range often offers the best tradeoff between stimulus, fatigue, injury risk, slow/fast fiber specificity, and mind-muscle connection, an argument can be made that a first-time program design could have most weekly working sets for the traps in this range, perhaps up to about 50% of them. The other 50% can perhaps be split evenly between the heavy (5-10) and light (20-30) rep ranges, as loading range diversity has been shown to be a potential benefit in its own right. 

Some trap movements are better suited for lower reps, such as the easily-loadable barbell shrug, while others, such as dumbbell shrugs, are more suited to higher reps.

When constructing a weekly training plan, it’s probably a good idea to train the heavy ranges before the lighter ranges. Because both types of training cause fatigue, they all interfere with each other to some extent. However, the muscle and connective tissue damage from heavier training is likely more substantial and presents a higher risk of injury if some damage already exists from earlier training. Thus, if you do sets of 5-10 on Monday and (nearly always) sustain some form of micro-tearing, sets of 10-20 on Wednesday are lower in absolute force magnitude and are unlikely to cause the micro-tearing to expand into a notable injury. On the other hand, if you’re pre-damaged from lots of sets of 10-20 on Monday, going even heavier in such a state on Wednesday in the 5-10 range is a bit more likely to result in injury. Thus, a potential sequencing of heavy-moderate-light during the week might be advisable, with a day or two of extra rest after the light session and before the next heavy session to make sure most damage has been healed and another productive week can begin. 

A sample arrangement of exercises, sets, and loads can look something like this:


Monday	Wednesday	Friday
Barbell Shrugs: 3 sets, 5-10 reps	Barbell Bent-Over Shrugs: 4 sets, 10-20 reps	Dumbbell Shrugs: 4 sets, 20-30 reps

Based on your personal responses to each of the main rep ranges, you can adjust how much volume you perform in any of them. For example, if you notice that you get a better stimulus (pumps, soreness, mind-muscle connection, etc.) and lower fatigue (joint stress, systemic fatigue, joint soreness, etc.) in some of the ranges vs. others, you can do more sets in those ranges and a bit less in others, though you should in most cases still include at least some work in the least productive ranges. For example, you might find that neither 5-10 nor 10-20 rep ranges work very well for your trap training, so you might only do a few sets of both in most weeks and do the vast majority of your sets in the 20-30 range. 

REST TIMES
When determining how long to rest between any two sets in training, our goal is to get enough rest to allow for the next set to be as close as possible to maximally productive. How can we ensure this? By answering 4 basic questions about our recovery status:

Has the target muscle locally recovered enough to do at least 5 reps on the next set?
Has the nervous system recovered enough to remove it as a limiting factor to target muscle performance?
Has the cardiorespiratory system recovered enough to remove it as a limiting factor to target muscle performance?
Have synergist muscles in the exercise being performed recovered enough to remove them as a limiting factor to target muscle performance?
It might take only 1-2 minutes to recover very well (let’s say, 90%) on all of those systems, but, because set to set recovery is asymptotic in nature, it might take another 3 minutes to get to 95% recovery and another 10 minutes to get to 99% recovery. Since you only have so much time to spend in the gym, 10 “90% recovered sets” in 45 minutes of training is a much more anabolic stimulus than only 3 “99% recovered” sets in that same amount of time. Thus, our recommendation is to make sure you can clearly check all 4 recovery boxes above, but not wait around for “near perfect recovery.” 

Here’s an example of what can be considered “very good” recovery between sets of trap training. Before you do another set of barbell shrugs, ask yourself:

Are my traps still burning from the last set, or do they feel ok again?
Do I feel like I can pull hard with my traps again, and I am mentally ready for another hard set, or do I need more time to rest?
Is my breathing more or less back to normal, or is it still very heavy?
Are my forearms still fatigued from holding the bar, or are they ready to support my traps in the upcoming set of shrugs?
If all of the above are clear for takeoff, you’re probably ready to do another set, and waiting much longer is highly unlikely to be of benefit. 

Most trap exercises only require the synergy of forearm muscles to any significant extent, so they have very few #4 limiting synergists, especially if you use versa grips to help with gripping. Because they have few or no synergists, their training doesn’t generate a lot of central or cardiorespiratory fatigue, so that cuts #2 and #3 down considerably. The result is that much trap training only has to contend with #1’s local recovery, which is usually very rapid in the well-vascularized traps. This means that many people can perform another productive trap set when the burn in the traps from the last set goes away, which can mean rest times of as low as 10 seconds! That being said, the most important consideration is to take the rest time you need, and not copy someone else’s, rush the process, or sit around needlessly for minutes after all 4 factors are good to go for your next set to commence.    

FREQUENCY
There are two main considerations for determining training frequency. The first is the duration of the increase in muscle growth after a bout of training between MEV and MRV. If such an increase in muscle growth continues for seven days, then perhaps a 1x / week frequency is optimal. If such an increase lasts only a day, then perhaps 6x / week for the same muscle group is much better. While direct research on muscle growth timecourses is very limited, it seems that typical training might cause a reliable 24-48 hour increase in muscle growth. This would mean that, if muscle growth elevation was the only variable of concern with regards to frequency, we should train every muscle 3-6 times per week. 

However, the second main consideration for determining training frequency is recovery. A single bout of training between MEV and MRV causes muscle growth to occur, but also presents some degree of fatigue. If we are to progress in training and allow adaptations to fully take hold over days and weeks, we must allow enough time to elapse between overloading sessions for most of our fatigue to dissipate. On average, the exact amount of fatigue dissipation must be at least enough to allow performance to return to baseline or higher, so an overload can be presented. In other words, if you can normally barbell shrug 155 for 15 reps, your next workout for this muscle group should take place when you're recovered enough to once again shrug at least 155 for 15 reps. Unfortunately, the timecourse of fatigue is usually a bit longer than that of muscle growth, making recovery, not muscle growth cessation, the limiting factor on frequency for most. In most per-session MEV-MRV training volumes, fatigue will take between one and four days to come back down enough to restore or improve on past performance, though this is highly dependent on the muscle and the specific exercises in question. 

How do you determine what training frequency is appropriate for you? You can start by training your traps at per-session MEV volumes. After each session, you note when soreness has abated and when you feel recovered enough psychologically to attempt another overloading workout. When you’re ready, and no later, go back to the gym and train traps again, with volumes just a bit higher than MEV (using the RP Set Progression Algorithm). If you’re recovering on time, keep coming back and training your traps as often as you have been. If you notice that you need more time to recover, add a day to your next post-trap-training window. If you’re recovering faster than you thought you could, train a bit more often. After a mesocycle of such adjustments, you will have a rough but very good guess as to what your average trap training frequency can be for most of your programs going forward. In fact, your frequency will not only be tailored exactly to your responses, but you’ll be pretty sure it’s close to optimal because it was literally derived from how fast you can recover; which is the very primary variable that determines frequency.

Just so that you have some expectation of where to start, most individuals can recover from trap training at a timecourse that allows for 2-4 sessions of traps per week at MEV-MRV volumes in the context of normal back, rear delt, and side delt training. However, only through direct experimentation on yourself can you tell where in this range is best for you and if maybe you’re even outside of this range. Just remember that so long as you’re recovered to train again (can perform at or above normal levels), training is a better idea than waiting to train, because higher frequency programs, at least in the short term, have shown to generate more muscle growth than needlessly lower ones. 

To improve your training frequency, you can alternate exercise selections between successive trap workouts. For example, if you do barbell shrugs on one day, you might do dumbbell shrugs or machine shrugs the next day, and so on. This rotation of slightly different exercises and movement patterns can take repeated stress off of very small and specific parts of your muscles and connective tissues, which might reduce chronic injury risk exposure.

PERIODIZATION
There are a few relevant timescales in periodization:

The repetition (1-9 seconds)
The set (5-30 repetitions)
The exercise (1-5 sets) 
The session (2-6 exercises)
The day (0-2 sessions)
The microcycle (usually 1 week of training)
The mesocycle (3-12 weeks)
The block (1-4 mesocycles)
The macrocycle (1-4 blocks)
We’ve already covered the most important details on most of these timescales, so in this section, we’ll focus on a brief understanding of how to manipulate training over a typical mesocycle and training block.

A mesocycle is composed of two phases: the accumulation phase and the deload phase. The accumulation phase lasts as long as it takes to hit systemic MRV, which, because fatigue accumulates in MEV+ training, has to happen at some point. For beginners with very high recovery abilities, it can take up to 12 weeks of increasingly more demanding training for systemic MRV to be reached and a deload to be required. For very advanced lifters that have very strong, large, and volume-resistant muscles, it can take only 3-4 weeks of accumulation training to reach systemic MRV and need to deload. The deload phase is designed to bring down the fatigue from the accumulation phase, and it usually only lasts a week or so (one microcycle).

When you begin a mesocycle of training, you should probably begin at or close to your MEV for all the muscle groups you’d like to improve during that mesocycle, for reasons described extensively in our book on the subject of training volume. Week to week, you can manipulate working sets by using the Set Progression algorithm from the Training Volume Landmarks for Muscle Growth article. You should seek to keep reps stable from week to week while letting your RIR decline from a 3 or 4 RIR start until it gets down to 0 (for exercises that don’t threaten the bar falling on you) or 1 (for those that do) in the last week of training. The way you keep the reps stable as RIR falls is by adding weight to the exercises you’re using. How much weight to add is a matter of an educated guess on your part. You want to add enough weight to get your target RIR with the same reps as last week. For example, if you did 100lbs last week for 10 reps on your first set of an exercise at 2 RIR, how much should you do next week to get 10 reps again but at 1 RIR? Well, you might think that adding 2.5lbs would be too easy, and you could honestly get 11 reps with that next week at 1 RIR, but adding 10lbs might require you to push to 0 RIR to get 10 reps, so you would just add 5lbs and that will probably take you where you need to be. If you’re making very rapid gains on an exercise, you might have a few weeks here and there where even though you increased weight by a bit, your RIR didn’t decline. You might have hit 8 reps at 100lbs at 3 RIR last week, and then hit 8 reps again at 3 RIR with 105lbs this week! This is a good thing, and lots of these weeks are how beginners can sometimes crank out up to 12 weeks of accumulation. Since getting to failure too soon is MUCH WORSE than getting there a bit slower, we recommend being conservative on nearly all weekly weight additions.

If you can’t realistically add weight, you can add reps. This might happen when, for example, you are using the 25lb dumbbells one week and then having to do the 30lbers next week, wildly slashing your reps. Just remember to stay within your general rep range and not leave it in any given meso. If you start at sets of about 5 reps, don’t add any more reps than will give you sets of 10, because that will take you out of the 5-10 range and no longer fulfill the needs of your training program in the way it was intended. If you start to exit a range by adding reps, add weight to take yourself back into that range, even if the increments are big and take you all the way down to the bottom of the range. Yes, this might mean that last week you were doing 20 reps with the 20lb dumbbells on your first set, and this week you’re back to only 10 reps with the 25lbers at the same or one less RIR, but that’s proper training!

Once you cannot tie previous reps in at least two consecutive sessions for a given muscle group, you have likely hit its local MRV, and need to reduce its training volume. Our recommendation is to take the next planned session with half of the planned working sets, half of the planned reps, and half of the load for recovery. In the session after, resume your load progression from before, but start at a number of sets halfway between where you started the meso and your MRV set number, and an RIR of around 2. Thus, for example, if you hit 100lbs for 10 reps on a first set last session (6 total sets in the session for that muscle group), whereas the week before, you hit 95lbs for 12 reps, your next workout can be 50lbs for 3 sets of about 5 reps. Then, next week, you resume with 105lbs, but shoot for 2 RIR and do 4 sets total, because you started the meso at 2 sets, and 4 is halfway between 2 and 6 sets. Continue to train normally after that until and unless you hit MRV again.

Systemic MRV is when you’re training so hard that your desire to train plummets, your sleep quality declines, your appetite falls, and you might get sick more often. It’s also when nearly all of your muscles start to hit local MRVs at about the same time. Once that happens (and be honest with yourself when it does), stop the accumulation phase and begin the deload phase.

The deload can be done many ways, but our recommendation is to take sets to MEV for the whole week. The load should be week 1’s load for the first half of the week and ½ of week 1’s load for the second half. The reps should be roughly half of all week 1’s reps for all sets during the deload week. This makes the deload VERY EASY, which is the whole point, since hard training doesn’t bring down fatigue! You should feel refreshed and be craving hard training toward the end of your deload week if you’re setting it up correctly. 

Those are the basics of periodization over the mesocycle. The training block is a sequence of mesocycles strung together for one unifying purpose. For example, a muscle gain block may be 3 mesocycles of 6 weeks each, one after another, with weight gain the goal for all 18 of those total weeks, or a fat loss block might be 2 mesocycles of 5 weeks long during which weight loss is the goal for all 10 of those weeks.

Though we can potentially alter all training variables over a training block, frequency, exercise selection, and loading are definitely noteworthy.

Frequency Periodization

When you start a training block, your MEVs are very low and so are your weekly MRVs. Thus, you can fit your total training volume relatively easily into lower frequencies, such as 2x per week per muscle group, for example. As training progresses and you start your next meso, not only do your per-session MEVs go up, but your weekly MRVs go up as well, making fitting all your training into just a few sessions more difficult. As well, you’re now quite used to the exercises, and recovery between sessions occurs much faster, allowing a higher frequency microcycle to be much more realistic. At this point, you can increase your frequency a bit, perhaps to an average of something like 3x per muscle group, for example. In the last one or two mesos, your per-session MEVs are very high and your per-week MRVs even higher. To really get the best gains, another bump in frequency is recommended, and you might go to 4x or so training per muscle group, and perhaps even higher. 

Unfortunately, super high frequencies might not be the most sustainable for a couple of reasons. First, muscles heal faster than connective tissues, and if you train with very high frequencies, sometimes your connective tissue recovery can lag behind your muscle recovery, which may set you up for injuries if unabated. Secondly, the sheer weekly volume that higher frequencies let you do productively might cause so much fatigue escalation as to not be sustainable for longer than a mesocycle or two. Thus, after training for a meso or two at your highest frequency, you might end the training block and seek to reduce the very high fatigue levels you have accumulated, in part by starting whatever phase you start next at lower frequencies.

Exercise Selection Periodization

For normal exercise selection decisions, you can just follow the 4-part exercise deletion and replacement guidelines in the variation section above. But as you add sessions from meso to meso with a climbing frequency, you’ll need to consider adding exercises. Yes, you can repeat exercises a few times in the week with different loads, but we recommend doing this sparingly, and more often adding in new exercises when you add new sessions as frequency climbs. Thus, you might start with an exercise on Monday and a different one on Thursday in a 2x meso, but when you move to 3x, you might have to add a new exercise on Friday, keeping the Monday exercise the same and moving the Thursday exercise to Wednesday. Because fatigue and wear and tear increase with each meso in a block, we recommend adding less systemically disruptive exercises more often than adding more disruptive ones. For example, you might consider adding some cable shrugs on that Friday 3x session but adding barbell shrugs to an already fatiguing week of trap training might be overkill. Yes, you can add very tough movements as you go, but we recommend against it in most cases. Thus, you start with pretty much only or mostly basic, high-stress moves such as barbell shrugs and dumbbell shrugs earlier in the block, and later on add cable shrugs, dumbbell lean shrugs, and other such less fatiguing exercises as you add in sessions to expand frequency over the training block.

Loading Periodization

Whatever exercises you’ve carried over from one meso to the next should be done in the same rep ranges as they were done in the last mesos. For example, if you did barbell rows in the 5-10 rep range on a first set in the last meso, in the next meso, you should continue your loading progression to stay in that same rep range, which often means just adding small increments of weight from where you last left off in the last meso, or lightening up the weight just enough to get similar reps at 3-4 RIR again in the first week. But for new exercises added in each meso as frequency goes up, we recommend adding in the moderate (10-20) and light (20-30) rep ranges instead of the heavy (5-10) range. This recommendation occurs for two reasons. First, as you take on more wear and tear and fatigue, adding more 5-10 rep movements might cause a large increase in injury risk, especially now that you’re asking your body to perform with such heavy loads with even less recovery time between sessions. Secondly, very high rep (20-30) training seems to cause robust gains over a meso or two, but in part because your body adapts to buffering metabolites so quickly, might not work nearly as well for much longer. Thus, you may want to start with heavier training in the first meso of a block, keep it for all remaining mesos, and add in lighter training with new sessions as you go, which also pairs well with the selection of less fatiguing exercises. Here’s an example of how that might look for the traps:


 	Meso 1	Meso 2	Meso 3
Mon

Barbell Shrugs: 5-10

Barbell Shrugs: 5-10

Barbell Shrugs: 5-10

Wed

x

Dumbbell Shrugs: 10-20

Dumbbell Shrugs: 10-20

Thurs

Dumbbell Shrugs: 10-20

x

x

Fri

x

Cable Shrugs: 10-20

Cable Shrugs: 10-20

Sat

x

 	
Dumbbell Shrugs: 20-30


Once you’ve done a whole training block, you can do a mesocycle of low frequency (2x) training at MV with mostly 5-10 rep ranges and compound movements to resensitize your muscles to volume and growth again. This meso can take about a month and can be good to pair with maintenance eating to bring down any diet fatigue you might have from hard dieting in the last block. If you don’t have any real diet fatigue, you can instead take around 2 weeks of active rest (sometimes just one week if you count the deload after your last meso), where you train with 1x frequency for every muscle, with only about 2 working sets per muscle per session, and with weights that are around 50% of your 5-10 range, but doing them for only 5-10 reps per set. This ultra-easy training can make you ready for another whole block of training in the gym and can even be replaced with no training at all if you’re feeling really beat up or tired. Once you’ve taken this easy time, you’re probably ready to give another training block a go!


TRAINING MODALITIES
Straight Sets

Straight sets are sets performed to 0-4 RIR, with enough rest time to recover all 4 limiting factors (see the rest time section above for details).

An ok choice for traps, though they recover so quickly that myoreps are often better.

Down Sets

Down sets are straight sets, but with less weight (usually 10-20% less) than the previous straight sets. By lowering the weight, you can keep reps over 5 per set, and/or keep the mind-muscle connection high and keep technique excellent to continue to have a high stimulus to fatigue ratio in every set of that exercise.  

It’s easy to lose the mind-muscle connection on traps, so down sets can definitely help there. 

Controlled Eccentrics and Pauses

Concentric, eccentric, and isometric phases of each exercise can be between half a second and 3 seconds long and still confer near-optimal effects on hypertrophy. In some cases, slowing down eccentrics and extending pauses can enhance technique, mind-muscle connection, and safety of the exercise.

Squeezing at the top of each shrug and stretch at the bottom can make a huge different in activating traps vs. just bouncing weight around.

Giant Sets 

Giant sets give you a certain weight to lift, an RIR range to hit (usually 0-4 RIR), and a goal of total reps over as many sets as it takes. An example is aiming to do 100lbs for however many sets it takes to get 60 total reps, while taking normal rest between each set. Such an approach can take the focus off of having to match or exceed the per-set reps you did last week, and can thus let you super-focus on technique and the mind-muscle connection, thus potentially improving both and getting more out of the training with exercises that can demand lots of technique and mind-muscle connection to be effective. If you’d like to be super precise in counting sets for your volume landmarks, we recommend counting giant sets at 2/3 of the contribution of straight sets, such that if you did 6 total sets to get to your giant set rep target, you can count that as 4 sets of “straight set equivalency” in terms of stimulus and fatigue. This discount is because with a higher focus on technique and mind-muscle connection and a lower focus on getting as many reps per set as possible, giant sets likely don’t cause as much fatigue as straight sets.

Because the mind-muscle connection is often tough with the traps, giant sets can be an excellent tool for getting the hang of new exercises.

Myoreps

Myoreps are just like straight sets in that they must check all 4 recovery boxes before doing another set. However, they are different in two ways. First, while the first set is usually between 10-20 reps (0-2 RIR), the next multiple sets only rest long enough to get between 5 and 10 reps each. This is to maximize the ratio of effective (near-failure) reps to total reps over the multiple sets. Secondly, for all of those successive sets to register the highest number of effective reps per set, the local recovery factor (the muscle itself) must be by far the most limiting, so that successive sets are not limited by the nervous system, the lungs, and other muscles, allowing the final reps of each set to recruit and tense the fastest and most growth-prone motor units. For this to be possible, only isolation exercises without limiting synergists are appropriate for myoreps. If you’d like to be super precise in counting sets for your volume landmarks, we recommend counting myorep sets each as the equivalent of a straight set. While they do have fewer reps, they are often taken closer to failure and thus turn out to be about as fatiguing. 

Excellent for the traps, which don’t really have any synergists (especially if you use versa grips), and are small enough to recover very quickly.

Drop Sets

Drop sets are exactly like myoreps, but with even shorter rest times because weight is reduced by 10-20% on average between each set. The effects are very similar. The advantage of drop sets is their time saving, and their slight disadvantage over myoreps is that dropping the weight a lot can reduce mind-muscle connection via reducing tension perception. If you’d like to be super precise in counting sets for your volume landmarks, we recommend counting drop sets each as the equivalent of a straight set. While they do have fewer reps and lighter loads, they are often taken closer to failure and in such rapid and painful succession that they turn out to be about as fatiguing.

Can be excellent for cable shrugs of various sorts, but you have to make sure to stay super focused on technique, as the pain and fatigue can quickly turn this into more of a shoulder dance than a trap exercise.

Pre-Exhaust Supersets

These supersets begin with an isolation exercise for a given muscle group, and with no rest after taking it to 0-2 RIR, end with a compound exercise to which the target muscle is a big contributor. The local pre-exhaust of the isolation exercise allows the target muscle to be by far the limiting factor for the compound exercise that follows, and lets it be exposed to a few more effective reps than it otherwise would be if that compound was done fresh. After each 2-exercise superset, 4-factor rest is again taken until the next 2-exercise superset begins. If you’d like to be super precise in counting sets for your volume landmarks, we recommend counting pre-exhaust supersets as 1.5x as the equivalent of a straight set. This is because the compound exercise done in the second part of the set is only limited (highly) by the target pre-exhausted muscle, and this isn’t nearly as fatiguing, especially systemically, as it would be if it were done fresh.

You can actually do a set of shrugs and then go right into a set of bent laterals or side laterals or even upright rows for an excellent trap stimulus. 

Occlusion Sets

Occlusion training is myorep training with the limb occluded just above the muscle. This occlusion causes the local muscle and nerve to be far and away the limiting factors on recovery between sets, and thus allows you to focus in on a target muscle group that might have otherwise been difficult to reach with non-occluded movements. The big benefit is time saving, because rest between occluded sets is only long enough to get another 5 reps, and you can also use weights at the very low end of the growth range and even a bit lower (20-30% 1RM). The downside is that the local vasculature adapts very quickly to occlusion, so it might not be very effective for any more than a mesocycle or two in a row. Also, some muscles are much harder than others to occlude, or even impossible to occlude. If you’d like to be super precise in counting sets for your volume landmarks, we recommend counting occlusion sets each as the equivalent of 2/3 of a straight set, as they cause much less systemic fatigue due to the lower reps and weights used.

The jokes about trap occlusion are nearly endless, so we’ll just leave you with that!

TRICEP (TRICEPS) GROWTH TRAINING TIPS

Updated: Jan 14, 2020

Let's also review our key training volume landmarks and relate them to training the triceps: 

MV = Maintenance Volume:
Perhaps around 4 sets per week are needed to maintain triceps size for experienced trainers, and that’s ON TOP OF the pressing from chest work. We recommend 2 weekly sessions for maintenance, so that’s 2 sets per session, but you can probably get away with one weekly triceps session for 4 sets and still maintain in an isocaloric state so long as you do some chest pressing later that week, and can do up to 3 sessions at 1-2 sets each as well.

MEV = Minimum Effective Volume:
Most intermediate-advanced lifters need at least 6 sets of direct triceps work per week to make gains, and for some, it’s even more than that. This is ON TOP OF normal chest pressing. If you’re training twice a week, that’s about 3 sets per session. It’s about 2 sets per session for 3x training, 1-2 sets for 4x training, and 1 set or so for 5x or 6x training.

MAV = Maximum Adaptive Volume:
The maximum adaptive volume of a single session of any trained muscle group is still speculative, but research suggests it’s probably no lower than 4 working sets per session and no higher than 12 working sets per session in most intermediates. When you design your program and progressions, having lots of sessions with much fewer than 4 working sets per muscle group per week for multiple weeks on end might not be very efficient, and you might benefit from combining a few of these lower volume sessions to get the same volume but in fewer weekly sessions. Also, not exceeding 12 sets per session per muscle group for more than a few weeks is probably a good idea.

MRV = Maximum Recoverable Volume:
The MRV depends highly on the number of sessions per week. With 2 sessions, the average intermediate MRV for triceps might be around 16 sets per week. With three sessions, it’s closer to 20 sets per week. With 4 sessions, it’s around 25 sets, and with 5 or 6 weekly sessions, it might be as high as 30 sets per week in many cases. A big factor in triceps MRV is the interaction between chest pressing and triceps work. If you’re doing a lot of chest pressing with closer grip variations, your triceps MRV will be much lower than if your chest work is more flye-heavy, wider grip, or just lower in volume in general. Also, some triceps exercises are much more fatiguing than others, especially to joint recovery. For example, you might be able to get up to 30 sets of cable triceps pushdowns and overhead dumbbell extensions per week, but you’re highly unlikely to survive that many sets of dips, JM presses, or skull crushers.

EXERCISES
The triceps are heavily involved in chest and some front delt moves. Here we only list the very most tricep-dominant of those moves and the isolation moves. This heavy involvement of the triceps in pushing work is a big reason for why their volume requirements and tolerances are so much lower than those of say, chest or back training. 

Barbell Triceps Overhead Extension
Assisted Dip
Barbell Skullcrusher
Cable Overhead Triceps Extension
Cable Single Arm Pushdown
Cable Triceps Pushdown
Dip
Dumbbell Skullcrusher
EZ Bar Overhead Triceps Extension
Inverted Skullcrusher
Machine Triceps Extension
Machine Triceps Pushdown
Rope Overhead Triceps Extension
Rope Pushdown
Seated EZ Bar Overhead Triceps Extension
JM Press
Seated Barbell Overhead Triceps Extension
VARIATION
Within a training session, we recommend including between 1 and 3 different triceps exercises, but no more than that in most cases, as doing more than 3 triceps movements in one session is likely just a needless burning of potential exercise variations you can save for later mesocycles. Within a single week (microcycle) of training, we recommend between 2 and 5 different triceps exercises. For example, if you train triceps 3x a week, you can do a heavy barbell overhead extension on one day, a lighter barbell overhead extension on the next day, and a cable pushdown version on the last day for 2 total exercises in the week. On the other hand, if you train triceps 6x per week, you might want to choose (though don’t have to choose) as many as 5 different exercises, with only one of them repeated in a heavier/lighter arrangement. Because you want to keep exercises variations fresh for when you need to change exercises (through injury or staleness, for example), you should use as few exercises per week (and thus, per mesocycle, as we recommend keeping the same exercises in every week of each meso) as you can to get the job done. If you can just do a few more sets of barbell overhead extensions and get a great workout, there’s no reason to switch to dumbbell overhead extensions, for example. If you’re doing an exercise, there should be a reason for it.

Every week of triceps training should probably include at least one isolation exercise (pushdowns or skull crushers, for example) and one compound exercise (dips, for example) for the triceps. Every few mesos, most lifters should have at least one exercise from the compound category (dips, for example), the horizontal or standing extension category (skull crushers or pushdowns, for example), and the overhead extension category for complete triceps development. Though it must be noted that much of the reason for including overhead extension is the stimulation of the triceps long head, which might already be effectively covered with normal back training.

Lastly, how do you know when it’s time to switch out a given exercise from your rotation to another exercise in your list of effective choices? The decision is based on answering just a few questions about the exercise you’re currently using:

Are you still making gains in rep strength on the exercise?
Is the exercise causing any aches or pains that are connective tissue related? And are these getting worse with each week or accumulating over multiple weeks?
Is there a phasic need for the exercise to change? In other words, is the exercise appropriate for the rep range you’re trying to use it for? Example: dips sets of 25 might just tire out your forearms and bother your wrists, but cable pushdowns for 25 pump up your triceps as intended. 
Are you getting a good mind-muscle connection on the exercise, or is it feeling stale and annoying to do?
If you are still hitting PRs on the exercise, it’s not causing any undue pains, you’re getting a good mind-muscle connection, and there’s no other need to change it, then don’t change it! If this means you keep an exercise around for up to a year or more, so be it! But, if an exercise isn’t yielding any more PRs for a whole meso (especially on a muscle gain or maintenance phase), hurting you beyond expected soreness, feels super stale, or is inappropriate for an upcoming rep range target, then you should replace it. Many times, the questions will fall on both sides, and then it’s up to you to make a wise choice considering all the 4 variables above.

RANGE OF MOTION
In too many cases in which someone complained that they couldn’t get a good triceps workout, their range of motion was the issue. Triceps looooove the stretch and because locking out the elbow is one of their primary functions in the human body, all of the reps you do should be locked out as well.

As you’ll see in the exercises videos above, maximum stretch at the bottom and a complete contraction are a BIG step in the right direction for triceps. 


LOADING
In general, like all muscles, the triceps benefit from weights in the 30%-85% 1RM range, which in many people roughly translates to a weight that results in between 5 and 30 reps on a first set taken to failure. We can split this range into heavy (5-10,) moderate (10-20), and light (20-30) categories, as there are tradeoffs to make between all of them.

The first point on loading is that the triceps, like most muscles, seems to benefit from some training in all three of the rep ranges listed above. Because the moderate (10-20 rep) range often offers the best tradeoff between stimulus, fatigue, injury risk, and slow/fast fiber specificity, and mind-muscle connection, an argument can be made that a first-time program design could have most weekly working sets for the triceps in this range, perhaps up to about 50% of them. The other 50% can perhaps be split evenly between the heavy (5-10) and light (20-30) rep ranges, as loading range diversity has been shown to be a potential benefit in its own right. 

While the 10-20 range can support nearly all types of exercises, the other ranges have some practical delineations. Movements like JM Presses are safely compatible in the 5-10 range, while dips, due to their instability, might be better off in the 10-20 range. Pushdowns are ideal in the 20-30 range, but forearm fatigue might prevent dips and overhead barbell extensions to be best in that range. 

When constructing a weekly training plan, it’s probably a good idea to train the heavy ranges before the lighter ranges. Because both types of training cause fatigue, they all interfere with each other to some extent. However, the muscle and connective tissue damage from heavier training is likely more substantial and presents a higher risk of injury if some damage already exists from earlier training. Thus, if you do sets of 5-10 on Monday and (nearly always) sustain some form of micro-tearing, sets of 10-20 on Wednesday are lower in absolute force magnitude and are unlikely to cause the micro-tearing to expand into a notable injury. On the other hand, if you’re pre-damaged from lots of sets of 10-20 on Monday, going even heavier in such a state on Wednesday in the 5-10 range is a bit more likely to result in injury. Thus, a potential sequencing of heavy-moderate-light during the week might be advisable, with a day or two of extra rest after the light session and before the next heavy session to make sure most damage has been healed and another productive week can begin. 

A sample arrangement of exercises, sets, and loads can look something like this:



Monday	Wednesday	Friday

JM Presses: 4 sets, 5-10 reps

Overhead EZ Extensions: 3 sets, 10-20 reps

Dips: 3 sets, 10-20 reps

Pushdowns: 4 sets, 20-30 reps


Based on your personal responses to each of the main rep ranges, you can adjust how much volume you perform in any of them. For example, if you notice that you get a better stimulus (pumps, soreness, mind-muscle connection, etc.) and lower fatigue (joint stress, systemic fatigue, joint soreness, etc.) in some of the ranges vs. others, you can do more sets in those ranges and a bit less in others, though you should in most cases still include at least some work in the least productive ranges. For example, you might find that neither 5-10 nor 20-30 rep ranges work very well for your triceps training, so you might only do a few sets of both in most weeks and do the vast majority of your sets in the 10-20 range.  

REST TIMES
When determining how long to rest between any two sets in training, our goal is for enough rest to be taken such that the next set is at least close to maximally productive. How can we ensure this? By answering 4 basic questions about our recovery status:

Has the target muscle locally recovered enough to do at least 5 reps on the next set?
Has the nervous system recovered enough to remove it as a limiting factor to target muscle performance?
Has the cardiorespiratory system recovered enough to remove it as a limiting factor to target muscle performance?
Have synergist muscles in the exercise being performed recovered enough to remove them as a limiting factor to target muscle performance?
It might take only 1-2 minutes to recover very well (let’s say, 90%) on all of those factors, but because set to set recovery is asymptotic in nature, it might take another 3 minutes to get to 95% recovery and another 10 minutes more to get to 99% recovery. Since you only have so much time to spend in the gym, 10 “90% recovered sets” in 45 minutes of training is a much more anabolic stimulus than only 3 “99% recovered” sets in that same amount of time. Thus, our recommendation is to make sure you can clearly check all 4 boxes of recovery above, but to not wait much longer than what can be considered “very good” recovery in the incredibly inefficient quest for “near perfect recovery.” 

Here’s an example of what can be considered “very good” recovery between sets of tricep training. Before you do another set of overhead barbell extensions, ask yourself:

Are my triceps still burning from the last set, or do they feel ok again?
Do I feel like I can push hard with my triceps again, and I am mentally ready for another hard set, or do I need more time to rest?
Is my breathing more or less back to normal, or is it still very heavy?
Are my shoulders and abs still very fatigued, or are they ready to support my triceps in the upcoming set of overhead barbell extensions?
If you can get the green light on all of these, you’re probably ready to do another set, and waiting much longer will almost certainly not be of benefit. 

You’ll notice that depending on the exercise and on the lifter, very different rest times will be generated by this questionnaire. For example, cable pushdowns might not even have synergist muscles, so question 4 doesn’t even apply and rest times can be less than 30 seconds, whereas overhead barbell extensions might need 2 minutes between sets just to regain normal breathing. And if you’re on the larger and stronger side of things, and your cardio isn’t great, you’ll be resting much longer than someone smaller, not as strong, and in excellent cardio shape. While average rest times between sets of triceps training will be between 30 seconds and 2 minutes, the most important consideration is to take the rest time you need, and not copy someone else’s, rush the process, or sit around needlessly for minutes after all 4 factors are good to go for your next set to commence.   

FREQUENCY
There are two main considerations for determining training frequency. The first is the duration of the increase in muscle growth seen after a bout of training between MEV and MRV. If such an increase in muscle growth lasts 7 days, then perhaps a once a week frequency is optimal. If such an increase lasts only a day, then perhaps 6 days a week for the same muscle group is much better. While direct research on muscle growth timecourses is very limited, it seems that typical training might cause a reliable 24-48 hour increase in muscle growth. This would mean that if muscle growth elevation was the only variable of concern with regards to frequency, we should train every muscle 3-6 times per week. 

However, the second main consideration on determining training frequency is recovery. A single bout of training between MEV and MRV causes muscle growth to occur, but it also presents some degree of fatigue. If we are to progress in training and allow adaptations to fully take hold over days and weeks, we must allow enough time to elapse between overloading sessions for at least most fatigue to dissipate. On average, the exact amount of fatigue dissipation must be at least enough to allow performance to return to baseline or higher, such than an overload can be presented. In other words, if you can normally skull crush 95 for 15 reps, asking yourself “when should my next triceps workout be after this last one” can be answered by “when will you be recovered enough to be able to skull crush at least 95 for 15 reps?” The timecourse of fatigue is usually a bit longer than that of muscle growth, unfortunately, so that for most people, recovery, not muscle growth cessation, will be the limiting factor on frequency. In most per-session MEV-MRV training volumes, fatigue will take between 1-2 days to come back down enough to restore or improve on past performance, and that highly depends on the muscle in question and even the exercises used. 

How do you determine what training frequency is appropriate for you? You can start by training your triceps at per-session MEV volumes. After each session, you note when soreness has abated and when you feel recovered enough psychologically to attempt another overloading workout. When you’re ready, and no later, go back to the gym and train triceps again, with volumes just a bit higher than MEV (using the RP Set Progression algorithm from the Training Volume Landmarks for Muscle Growth article). If you’re recovering on time, keep coming back and training your triceps as often as you have been. If you notice that you need more time to recover, add a day to your next post-triceps-training window. If you’re recovering faster than you thought you could, train a bit more often. After a mesocycle of such adjustments, you will have a rough but very good guess as to what your average triceps training frequency can be for most of your programs going forward. In fact, your frequency will not only be tailored exactly to your responses, but you’ll be pretty sure it’s close to optimal because it was literally derived from how fast you can recover; which is the very primary variable that determines frequency. 

Just so that you have some expectation of where to start, most individuals can recover from triceps training at a timecourse that allows for 2-4 sessions of triceps per week at MEV-MRV volumes in the context of normal chest training. However, only through direct experimentation on yourself can you tell where in this range is best for you and if maybe you’re even outside of this range. Just remember that so long as you’re recovered to train again (can perform at or above normal levels), training is a better idea than waiting to train, because higher frequency programs, at least in the short term, have shown to generate more muscle growth than needlessly lower ones. 

To improve your training frequency, you can alternate exercise selections between successive triceps workouts. For example, if you do barbell overhead extensions on one day, you might do dips or cable pushdowns the next day, and so on. This rotation of slightly different exercises and movement patterns can take repeated stress off of very small and specific parts of your muscles and connective tissues, which might reduce chronic injury risk exposure.

Please note that when you’re determining your triceps training frequency, you’ll have to juggle it a bit with your chest and front delt training frequencies, as unrecovered triceps can impede your chest and front delt training, and even chest and front delt training sessions themselves can tax your triceps enough to require a frequency reduction for direct triceps training.  

PERIODIZATION
There are a few relevant timescales in periodization:

The repetition (1-9 seconds)
The set (5-30 repetitions)
The exercise (1-5 sets) 
The session (2-6 exercises)
The day (0-2 sessions)
The microcycle (usually 1 week of training)
The mesocycle (3-12 weeks)
The block (1-4 mesocycles)
The macrocycle (1-4 blocks)
We’ve already covered the most important details on most of these timescales, so in this section, we’ll focus on a brief understanding of how to manipulate training over a typical mesocycle and training block.

A mesocycle is composed of two phases: the accumulation phase and the deload phase. The accumulation phase lasts as long as it takes to hit systemic MRV, which, because fatigue accumulates in MEV+ training, has to happen at some point. For beginners with very high recovery abilities, it can take up to 12 weeks of increasingly more demanding training for systemic MRV to be reached and a deload to be required. For very advanced lifters that have very strong, large, and volume-resistant muscles, it can take only 3-4 weeks of accumulation training to reach systemic MRV and need to deload. The deload phase is designed to bring down the fatigue from the accumulation phase, and it usually only lasts a week or so (one microcycle).

When you begin a mesocycle of training, you should probably begin at or close to your MEV for all the muscle groups you’d like to improve during that mesocycle, for reasons described extensively in our book on the subject of training volume. Week to week, you can manipulate working sets by using the Set Progression algorithm from the Training Volume Landmarks for Muscle Growth article. You should seek to keep reps stable from week to week while letting your RIR decline from a 3 or 4 RIR start until it gets down to 0 (for exercises that don’t threaten the bar falling on you) or 1 (for those that do) in the last week of training. The way you keep the reps stable as RIR falls is by adding weight to the exercises you’re using. How much weight to add is a matter of an educated guess on your part. You want to add enough weight to get your target RIR with the same reps as last week. For example, if you did 100lbs last week for 10 reps on your first set of an exercise at 2 RIR, how much should you do next week to get 10 reps again but at 1 RIR? Well, you might think that adding 2.5lbs would be too easy, and you could honestly get 11 reps with that next week at 1 RIR, but adding 10lbs might require you to push to 0 RIR to get 10 reps, so you would just add 5lbs and that will probably take you where you need to be. If you’re making very rapid gains on an exercise, you might have a few weeks here and there where even though you increased weight by a bit, your RIR didn’t decline. You might have hit 8 reps at 100lbs at 3 RIR last week, and then hit 8 reps again at 3 RIR with 105lbs this week! This is a good thing, and lots of these weeks are how beginners can sometimes crank out up to 12 weeks of accumulation. Since getting to failure too soon is MUCH WORSE than getting there a bit slower, we recommend being conservative on nearly all weekly weight additions.

If you can’t realistically add weight, you can add reps. This might happen when, for example, you are using the 25lb dumbbells one week and then having to do the 30lbers next week, wildly slashing your reps. Just remember to stay within your general rep range and not leave it in any given meso. If you start at sets of about 5 reps, don’t add any more reps than will give you sets of 10, because that will take you out of the 5-10 range and no longer fulfill the needs of your training program in the way it was intended. If you start to exit a range by adding reps, add weight to take yourself back into that range, even if the increments are big and take you all the way down to the bottom of the range. Yes, this might mean that last week you were doing 20 reps with the 20lb dumbbells on your first set, and this week you’re back to only 10 reps with the 25lbers at the same or one less RIR, but that’s proper training!

Once you cannot tie previous reps in at least two consecutive sessions for a given muscle group, you have likely hit its local MRV, and need to reduce its training volume. Our recommendation is to take the next planned session with half of the planned working sets, half of the planned reps, and half of the load for recovery. In the session after, resume your load progression from before, but start at a number of sets halfway between where you started the meso and your MRV set number, and an RIR of around 2. Thus, for example, if you hit 100lbs for 10 reps on a first set last session (6 total sets in the session for that muscle group), whereas the week before, you hit 95lbs for 12 reps, your next workout can be 50lbs for 3 sets of about 5 reps. Then, next week, you resume with 105lbs, but shoot for 2 RIR and do 4 sets total, because you started the meso at 2 sets, and 4 is halfway between 2 and 6 sets. Continue to train normally after that until and unless you hit MRV again.

Systemic MRV is when you’re training so hard that your desire to train plummets, your sleep quality declines, your appetite falls, and you might get sick more often. It’s also when nearly all of your muscles start to hit local MRVs at about the same time. Once that happens (and be honest with yourself when it does), stop the accumulation phase and begin the deload phase.

The deload can be done many ways, but our recommendation is to take sets to MEV for the whole week. The load should be week 1’s load for the first half of the week and ½ of week 1’s load for the second half. The reps should be roughly half of all week 1’s reps for all sets during the deload week. This makes the deload VERY EASY, which is the whole point, since hard training doesn’t bring down fatigue! You should feel refreshed and be craving hard training toward the end of your deload week if you’re setting it up correctly. 

Those are the basics of periodization over the mesocycle. The training block is a sequence of mesocycles strung together for one unifying purpose. For example, a muscle gain block may be 3 mesocycles of 6 weeks each, one after another, with weight gain the goal for all 18 of those total weeks, or a fat loss block might be 2 mesocycles of 5 weeks long during which weight loss is the goal for all 10 of those weeks.

Though we can potentially alter all training variables over a training block, frequency, exercise selection, and loading are definitely noteworthy.

Frequency Periodization

When you start a training block, your MEVs are very low and so are your weekly MRVs. Thus, you can fit your total training volume relatively easily into lower frequencies, such as 2x per week per muscle group, for example. As training progresses and you start your next meso, not only do your per-session MEVs go up, but your weekly MRVs go up as well, making fitting all your training into just a few sessions more difficult. As well, you’re now quite used to the exercises, and recovery between sessions occurs much faster, allowing a higher frequency microcycle to be much more realistic. At this point, you can increase your frequency a bit, perhaps to an average of something like 3x per muscle group, for example. In the last one or two mesos, your per-session MEVs are very high and your per-week MRVs even higher. To really get the best gains, another bump in frequency is recommended, and you might go to 4x or so training per muscle group, and perhaps even higher. 

Unfortunately, super high frequencies might not be the most sustainable for a couple of reasons. First, muscles heal faster than connective tissues, and if you train with very high frequencies, sometimes your connective tissue recovery can lag behind your muscle recovery, which may set you up for injuries if unabated. Secondly, the sheer weekly volume that higher frequencies let you do productively might cause so much fatigue escalation as to not be sustainable for longer than a mesocycle or two. Thus, after training for a meso or two at your highest frequency, you might end the training block and seek to reduce the very high fatigue levels you have accumulated, in part by starting whatever phase you start next at lower frequencies.

Exercise Selection Periodization

For normal exercise selection decisions, you can just follow the 4-part exercise deletion and replacement guidelines in the variation section above. But as you add sessions from meso to meso with a climbing frequency, you’ll need to consider adding exercises. Yes, you can repeat exercises a few times in the week with different loads, but we recommend doing this sparingly, and more often adding in new exercises when you add new sessions as frequency climbs. Thus, you might start with an exercise on Monday and a different one on Thursday in a 2x meso, but when you move to 3x, you might have to add a new exercise on Friday, keeping the Monday exercise the same and moving the Thursday exercise to Wednesday. Because fatigue and wear and tear increase with each meso in a block, we recommend adding less systemically disruptive exercises more often than adding more disruptive ones. For example, you might consider adding some pushdowns on that Friday 3x session but adding barbell JM presses to an already fatiguing week of tricep training might be overkill. Yes, you can add very tough movements as you go, but we recommend against it in most cases. Thus, you start with pretty much only or mostly basic, high-stress moves such as barbell JM presses and weighted dips earlier in the block, and later on add pushdowns, cable overhead extensions, and other such less fatiguing exercises as you add in sessions to expand frequency over the training block. 

Loading Periodization

Whatever exercises you’ve carried over from one meso to the next should be done in the same rep ranges as they were done in the last mesos. For example, if you did barbell JM presses in the 5-10 rep range on a first set in the last meso, in the next meso, you should continue your loading progression to stay in that same rep range, which often means just adding small increments of weight from where you last left off in the last meso, or lightening up the weight just enough to get similar reps at 3-4 RIR again in the first week. But for new exercises added in each meso as frequency goes up, we recommend adding in the moderate (10-20) and light (20-30) rep ranges instead of the heavy (5-10) range. This recommendation occurs for two reasons. First, as you take on more wear and tear and fatigue, adding more 5-10 rep movements might cause a large increase in injury risk, especially now that you’re asking your body to perform with such heavy loads with even less recovery time between sessions. Secondly, very high rep (20-30) training seems to cause robust gains over a meso or two, but in part because your body adapts to buffering metabolites so quickly, might not work nearly as well for much longer. Thus, you may want to start with heavier training in the first meso of a block, keep it for all remaining mesos, and add in lighter training with new sessions as you go, which also pairs well with the selection of less fatiguing exercises. Here’s an example of how that might look for the triceps:

 	Meso 1	Meso 2	Meso 3
Mon

Weighted Dips: 5-10

Weighted Dips: 5-10

Weighted Dips: 5-10

Wed

x

x

x

Thurs

Barbell JM Presses: 10-20

Barbell JM Presses: 10-20

Barbell JM Presses: 10-20

Fri

x

Overhead EZ Extensions: 10-20

Overhead EZ Extensions: 10-20

Sat

x

x	
Pushdowns: 20-30


Once you’ve done a whole training block, you can do a mesocycle of low frequency (2x) training at MV with mostly 5-10 rep ranges and compound movements to resensitize your muscles to volume and growth again. This meso can take about a month and can be good to pair with maintenance eating to bring down any diet fatigue you might have from hard dieting in the last block. If you don’t have any real diet fatigue, you can instead take around 2 weeks of active rest (sometimes just one week if you count the deload after your last meso), where you train with 1x frequency for every muscle, with only about 2 working sets per muscle per session, and with weights that are around 50% of your 5-10 range, but doing them for only 5-10 reps per set. This ultra-easy training can make you ready for another whole block of training in the gym and can even be replaced with no training at all if you’re feeling really beat up or tired. Once you’ve taken this easy time, you’re probably ready to give another training block a go!

TRAINING MODALITIES
Straight Sets

Straight sets are sets performed to 0-4 RIR, with enough rest time to recover all 4 limiting factors (see the rest time section above for details).

The triceps thrive from conventional straight sets, which should be the default for the majority of triceps training.

Down Sets

Down sets are straight sets, but with less weight (usually 10-20% less) than the previous straight sets. By lowering the weight, you can keep reps over 5 per set, and/or keep the mind-muscle connection high and keep technique excellent to continue to have a high stimulus to fatigue ratio in every set of that exercise.  

Can be excellent for triceps stimulus once reps have fallen too low. A really great tool for dips; whereby you do a few sets of unweighted dips after a few sets of weighted dips. The mind-muscle connection on the latter sets is outlandish. 

Controlled Eccentrics and Pauses

Concentric, eccentric, and isometric phases of each exercise can be between half a second and 3 seconds long and still confer near-optimal effects on hypertrophy. In some cases, slowing down eccentrics and extending pauses can enhance technique, mind-muscle connection, and safety of the exercise.

A very good idea for skull crushers and dips, as shoulder and elbow injury are definitely possible if you rush these exercises. Also, slow eccentrics can enhance technique on triceps movements, for example really letting you feel which elbow position taxes triceps the most on dips.

Giant Sets 

Giant sets give you a certain weight to lift, an RIR range to hit (usually 0-4 RIR), and a goal of total reps over as many sets as it takes. An example is aiming to do 100lbs for however many sets it takes to get 60 total reps, while taking normal rest between each set. Such an approach can take the focus off of having to match or exceed the per-set reps you did last week, and can thus let you super-focus on technique and the mind-muscle connection, thus potentially improving both and getting more out of the training with exercises that can demand lots of technique and mind-muscle connection to be effective. If you’d like to be super precise in counting sets for your volume landmarks, we recommend counting giant sets at 2/3 of the contribution of straight sets, such that if you did 6 total sets to get to your giant set rep target, you can count that as 4 sets of “straight set equivalency” in terms of stimulus and fatigue. This discount is because with a higher focus on technique and mind-muscle connection and a lower focus on getting as many reps per set as possible, giant sets likely don’t cause as much fatigue as straight sets.

Triceps technique is simple, failure proximity easy to judge, and especially in presses and extensions, difficult to cheat. This limits the utility of giant sets in triceps training.

Myoreps

Myoreps are just like straight sets in that they must check all 4 recovery boxes before doing another set. However, they are different in two ways. First, while the first set is usually between 10-20 reps (0-2 RIR), the next multiple sets only rest long enough to get between 5 and 10 reps each. This is to maximize the ratio of effective (near-failure) reps to total reps over the multiple sets. Secondly, for all of those successive sets to register the highest number of effective reps per set, the local recovery factor (the muscle itself) must be by far the most limiting, so that successive sets are not limited by the nervous system, the lungs, and other muscles, allowing the final reps of each set to recruit and tense the fastest and most growth-prone motor units. For this to be possible, only isolation exercises without limiting synergists are appropriate for myoreps. If you’d like to be super precise in counting sets for your volume landmarks, we recommend counting myorep sets each as the equivalent of a straight set. While they do have fewer reps, they are often taken closer to failure and thus turn out to be about as fatiguing. 

An excellent choice in triceps training, especially in low-systemic demand exercises like pushdowns. More compound moves like skulls and dips should probably be done straight-set style.

Drop Sets

Drop sets are exactly like myoreps, but with even shorter rest times because weight is reduced by 10-20% on average between each set. The effects are very similar. The advantage of drop sets is their time saving, and their slight disadvantage over myoreps is that dropping the weight a lot can reduce mind-muscle connection via reducing tension perception. If you’d like to be super precise in counting sets for your volume landmarks, we recommend counting drop sets each as the equivalent of a straight set. While they do have fewer reps and lighter loads, they are often taken closer to failure and in such rapid and painful succession that they turn out to be about as fatiguing.

A great tool for pushdowns and other easily-loadable exercises.

Pre-Exhaust Supersets

These supersets begin with an isolation exercise for a given muscle group, and with no rest after taking it to 0-2 RIR, end with a compound exercise to which the target muscle is a big contributor. The local pre-exhaust of the isolation exercise allows the target muscle to be by far the limiting factor for the compound exercise that follows, and lets it be exposed to a few more effective reps than it otherwise would be if that compound was done fresh. After each 2-exercise superset, 4-factor rest is again taken until the next 2-exercise superset begins. If you’d like to be super precise in counting sets for your volume landmarks, we recommend counting pre-exhaust supersets as 1.5x as the equivalent of a straight set. This is because the compound exercise done in the second part of the set is only limited (highly) by the target pre-exhausted muscle, and this isn’t nearly as fatiguing, especially systemically, as it would be if it were done fresh.

The triceps are almost the standard-bearer for the pre-exhaust method. Skull crushers to close grip benches, pushdowns to pushups, overhead extensions to incline close grip presses, and for the very strong, pushdowns to dips, and then perhaps dips to pushups right after! If you have trouble feeling your triceps on the more compound movements, supersets are the way to do it. 

Occlusion Sets

Occlusion training is myorep training with the limb occluded just above the muscle. This occlusion causes the local muscle and nerve to be far and away the limiting factors on recovery between sets, and thus allows you to focus in on a target muscle group that might have otherwise been difficult to reach with non-occluded movements. The big benefit is time saving, because rest between occluded sets is only long enough to get another 5 reps, and you can also use weights at the very low end of the growth range and even a bit lower (20-30% 1RM). The downside is that the local vasculature adapts very quickly to occlusion, so it might not be very effective for any more than a mesocycle or two in a row. Also, some muscles are much harder than others to occlude, or even impossible to occlude. If you’d like to be super precise in counting sets for your volume landmarks, we recommend counting occlusion sets each as the equivalent of 2/3 of a straight set, as they cause much less systemic fatigue due to the lower reps and weights used.

Triceps can be occluded, but there doesn’t seem to be anything occlusion offers that pre-exhaust supersets can’t do for the triceps. If you’re injured, however, occlusion training can be an excellent choice.

